Unified Housing Strategy July 2025 Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Acknowledgements

Metro Planning Team Lucy Kempf Executive Director Angela Hubbard Housing Division Director Kaycee Ensign Project Manager Richel Albright Gregory Claxton Hannah Davis Daryl Hill Travis Miller

Consultant Team HR&A Advisors MEPR Agency Pillars Development, LLC Spencer Rose Consulting, LLC

Technical Advisory Committee Metro Action Commission Metropolitan Development and Housing Agency Metro Social Services Metro Courts Office of Homeless Services Planning Department

Community Ambassadors AgeWell Middle Tennessee Monroe Harding Nashville Organized for Action and Hope (NOAH) Neighbor 2 Neighbor Stand Up Nashville Tennessee Disability Coalition Tennessee Immigrant and Refugee Rights Coalition The Contributor Urban League of Middle Tennessee

Metro Departments and Agencies Davidson County Trustee’s Office Health and Educational Facilities Board Industrial Development Board Metro Action Commission Metropolitan Development and Housing Agency Metro Finance Metro Human Resources Metro Legal Metro Office of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Metro Office of Homeless Services Metro Public Health Department Metro Social Services

Other Organizations Affordable Housing Resources Amazon Bristol Development Group CA South Community ConneXor Community Foundation of Middle Tennessee Department of Human and Organizational Development, Vanderbilt University Dismas House Giarratana Greater Nashville Realtors Greater Nashville Regional Council Habitat for Humanity of Greater Nashville Hawkins Partners HND Craighead Development Holladay Ventures JP Morgan Chase

LDG Development Legal Aid Society Love-Hart Enterprises MarketStreet Enterprises Nashville Hispanic Bar Association Nelson Community Partners Pathway Affordable Housing Corporation Pathway Housing Fund Pinnacle Financial Partners Pizzuti Powell Project Return R.E.D. Academy, Urban League of Middle Tennessee Regions Bank Republic Bank ROC USA Tennessee Affordable Housing Coalition

Tennessee Fair Housing Council Tennessee Housing Development Agency Tennessee State University The Catalyst Fund The Clear Blue Company Trent Development Group Urban Campus and Core Urban Housing Solutions

A Special Thank You

We extend our sincere appreciation to all the community members who contributed their time, insights, and stories to the development of the Unified Housing Strategy. Whether you attended a community listening session, responded to the survey, or both, you were instrumental in shaping a plan that reflects the needs and aspirations of our city.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 2

Table of Contents

1. Introduction and Background

2. Historic Trends and Current Conditions

A. Key Findings

B. How Much Housing Do We Need

C. Ecosystem Analysis

D. Resource Analysis

E. Regulatory Analysis

3. How Nashville Can Advance Housing Security

4. UHS Strategies and Actions

5. Moving Forward: Implementing the Unified Housing Strategy

6. 10-Year Implementation Plan

7. Appendices

A. Glossary

B. Methodologies, Data Sources, and Case Studies

C. UHS Development Community Engagement Summary

D. Housing Agency Overviews

E. Program Inventory and Profiles

F. Affordable Housing Finance 101

G. Analysis of Potential Revenue Sources

H. New or Underutilized Funding Sources

I. The Barnes Fund Recommended Policy and Organizational Changes

J. Philanthropic Contribution Opportunities

K. Summary of Public Feedback on Draft UHS

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 3 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Introduction and BackgroundNashville Unified Housing Strategy | 4 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 4

Nashville is a vibrant community that many wish to call home. The very nature of our city and the values we share make Nashville a great place to live. However, its growth has also presented challenges, particularly in housing affordability. Home prices have steadily increased, often outpacing wage growth making it difficult for many Nashvillians to find safe and stable housing. From young families to retirees, many residents struggle to afford homes in an increasingly competitive market. To address these challenges, Nashville has taken significant steps to make housing more affordable. Metro Nashville has created its first standalone Housing Division, focused entirely on expanding access to affordable housing. Additionally, the city has established the Office of Homeless Services (OHS) to better support our unhoused community. The Metropolitan Development and Housing Agency (MDHA) continues to transform its portfolio into vibrant mixed-income neighborhoods while deploying critical rental assistance and funding for housing and community development projects. Private partners, such as the Amazon Housing Equity Fund, have invested in local affordable housing initiatives, while local nonprofits are stepping up to increase housing development and train future developers with a focus on affordability. These collective efforts reflect Nashville’s commitment to ensuring that all residents have access to stable, affordable housing as the city continues to grow and thrive.

Many have voiced that without an effective strategy, Nashvillians who embody the city’s character and provide critical services in the community will continue to be priced out. In April 2024, Metro set out to create a comprehensive, community-driven housing strategy focused on advancing housing security for all Nashvillians. Metro Nashville’s Housing Division led the development of the Unified Housing Strategy (UHS) alongside the support of multiple public and private partners. This effort is but one part of a broader platform of the Division’s policy and program accomplishments, since its establishment in 2022 within the Metro Nashville Planning Department. These accomplishments include:

1. Establishing three new programs,

2. Securing new federal funding,

3. Supporting the creation and preservation of 3,000 affordable homes.

Since April 2024, the Housing Division and its partners have participated in meaningful community and stakeholder engagement and conducted robust analyses to produce a UHS that not only directs Metro’s approach to meeting Nashville’s housing needs but also offers a call to action for private participation. The most important contributions to the UHS were from the residents of Nashville who shared their housing journeys. Ultimately, the UHS is for you.

How will the UHS respond to unexpected challenges like political changes, economic downturns, or natural disasters?

The UHS is a living document, designed to be recalibrated annually. As conditions change— whether due to economic shifts, policy changes, or other challenges—our actions and priorities will adapt to ensure continued progress on housing affordability and stability.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 5

A Vision for Housing Security for All

The Metro Housing Division believes that every Nashvillian, regardless of race, age, economic status or physical ability, deserves a safe and affordable place to call home, which is why this is at the core of the division’s vision statement. Key partners have similar visions and missions. For example, the Metro Office of Homeless Services has a vision to secure attainable and accessible housing for all Nashvillians, and MDHA’s mission is to create quality affordable housing opportunities, support neighborhoods, strengthen communities, and help build a greater Nashville. Yet, the ability to secure and maintain an affordable and quality home has become increasingly challenging for many in our community. As is discussed in the Key Findings, despite Nashville’s progress to develop housing options, rental and homeownership prices continue to rise and too many Nashvillians are forced to choose between paying for rent or medicine or healthy foods. These findings reflect current and projected housing challenges based on recent trends, but deep shifts in our economic and political landscape will exacerbate these challenges.

Nashville requires an ambitious, comprehensive strategy that addresses the root cause of issues of affordability and acknowledges the importance of equality in our housing policies, where history illustrates deep failures. Our goal is to create long-term solutions for increasing housing supply and preserving existing affordable homes, and strengthening tenant protections through a coordinated housing ecosystem that is equipped to meet the needs of our community. Nashvillians deserve a housing strategy that ensures older adults who wish to remain in their homes are able to do so, persons with disabilities have housing that meets their accessibility needs, children have spaces to learn and thrive, and all – including Black and Brown families – have the same opportunity to build wealth.

The vision, strategies, and actions outlined in the UHS are a collective call to action – Metro government cannot advance this work alone. Achieving housing security for all Nashvillians requires resources from all levels of government (local, state, and federal), greater participation from the philanthropic and corporate sectors as well as improved coordination and efficiency from housing agencies, nonprofits and developers. The strategies and actions were crafted based on what is truly needed - not merely what is currently achievable. However, our ability to accomplish these goals is intrinsically tied to our economic environment and the growing uncertainty around economic conditions and federally funded programs necessitate that these strategies and actions be continuously revisited. Shifts in funding availability, policy changes, and economic challenges could have sweeping impacts on the ability of public, private, and nonprofit partners to sustain efforts at their current levels and implement new initiatives. For example, loss of federal funding puts a greater strain on Metro to deliver critical services and stretch its dollars. What is feasible today may not be feasible tomorrow, and adaptability will be key to ensuring long-term success.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 6 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Objectives of the Unified Housing Strategy

While several studies, plans, and initiatives have been conducted to understand and address Nashville’s housing needs, no comprehensive strategy or plan existed. Rather than duplicating previous efforts, Metro sought to build upon this work, including the initial recommendations offered in the 2021 Affordable Housing Task Force Report, to create a single direction to guide Metro’s approach to advancing housing security. The Unified Housing Strategy (UHS) informs local decisions on resource allocation and systems delivery, housing types, tenure, and affordability targets throughout the city, as well as land use and other local policies. Further, the UHS highlights the crucial role of private partners in the housing ecosystem. Informed by local voices and best practices, the UHS provides comprehensive and specific strategies, goals, and action items needed to effectively organize and mobilize key leaders and partners around the shared vision of advancing housing security for all.

Objectives of the Unified Housing Strategy include:

1. Expand permanent housing options affordable to Nashvillians at all income levels, therefore reducing the

percentage of Nashvillians who are cost-burdened;

2. Increase access to housing for all protected classes;

3. Support residents with resources and policies to achieve and maintain housing security and stability; and

4. Ensure that Nashville’s housing stock and systems are resilient and sustainable.

In developing a housing strategy, it is important to understand how current challenges came to exist. Data shows that in Nashville, like many other American cities, Black and Brown families, do not have equal access to the housing market, such as current home ownership rates, for example. This is but one part of the legacy of the discriminatory redlining practices of the last century. Misalignment in the income and labor market further drives outcomes.

All Nashvillians should be afforded the opportunity to participate in and benefit from our city’s economy today and in the future. Nashville’s The best research shows that economically integrated neighborhoods and communities position residents best for educational and job market outcomes. In producing this Unified Housing Strategy, Nashville pursued multiple paths and a collective approach towards advancing these goals by creating housing at the price points that meet Nashvillians’ needs, broadening the housing choices available to residents, and reducing barriers to accessing and maintaining dignified, stable housing.

In 2021, Nashville’s Affordable Housing Task Force identified four principles that guide Metro’s approach to affordable housing, which the Housing Division defines as housing in which households with incomes at or below 80% of the area median income (AMI, an official measure of income relative to the housing marketing as a whole) pay no more than 30% of their incomes for housing costs. (See Figure 1 for the current AMI levels for the Metro Nashville region.1) These principles, which focus on racial equality, innovation, connectivity, and accessibility, and economic resilience and risk education, are the foundation on which the Unified Housing Strategy is built.

1 The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) releases updated AMI data annually. The Housing Division maintains the most recent AMI info on the Affordable Housing Dashboard that can be found on the State of Housing in Nashville web page.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 7 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Figure 1: 2024 Area Median Income (AMI) for Nashville-Davidson County (Source: US Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2024)

Housing Category 30% of AMI 50% of AMI 60% of AMI 75% of AMI 80% of AMI AMI of All

Households

1-Person Household $22,450 $37,450 $44,940 $56,150 $59,850 $74,850

2-Person Household $25,650 $42,800 $51,360 $64,150 $68,400 $85,550

3-Person Household $28,850 $42,800 $51,360 $64,150 $68,400 $85,550

4-Person Household $32,050 $53,450 $64,140 $80,200 $85,500 $106,900

NOTE: The AMI for Nashville includes a ten-county census with the following areas: Cannon County, TN; Cheatham County, TN; Davidson County, TN; Dickson County, TN; Robertson County, TN; Rutherford County, TN; Sumner County, TN; Trousdale County, TN; Williamson County, TN; and Wilson County, TN.

In addition to the guiding principles, the Unified Housing Strategy also complements Metro’s efforts to prevent and end homelessness, support climate resiliency, improve infrastructure and mobility options, and bolster economic development. Implementation incorporates and supports the Homelessness Planning Council Strategic Plan, Choose How You Move initiatives, MDHA’s Five-Year Consolidated Plan for Housing and Community Development, NashvilleNext, Metro Housing Division and Urban Land Institute’s Technical Assistance Panel Report – Sustaining Nashville: Building Sustainability and Resilience into Affordable Housing, and the forthcoming Housing and Infrastructure Study.

The UHS will be a living document, with public-facing performance metrics showing the collective progress in meeting the UHS strategies. It sets forth actions to increase housing security over the next ten years but is also positioned to respond to Nashville’s dynamic housing market and unpredictable disrupters.

Who needs affordable housing?

The Housing Division defines affordable housing as housing that is restricted to households earning ≤80% of the Area Median Income (AMI).

An employee working full time (40 hours) earning minimum wage earns on average $22k/ year (<30% AMI)

Affordable housing costs would be ~$550/mo.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 8 Hotel clerks earn on average $33k/year. (<50% of the AMI)

Affordable housing costs would be ~ $825/mo

Hairstylists earn on average $43k/year (<60% of the AMI)

Affordable housing costs would be ~ $1,075/mo

Family social worker earns on average $57k/year (<80% of the AMI)

Affordable housing costs would be ~ $1425/mo.

Source: Bureau of Labor Statics

Unified Housing Strategy Development

UHS Development

Work on the UHS began in April 2024 and its development was informed by input from various stakeholders, analyses of market trends, socioeconomic data, evaluation of programs and policies, and research on best practices from across the nation. Metro Nashville’s Housing Division oversaw development of the strategy with the support of HR&A Advisors, a public policy and real estate advisory firm that has robust experience developing similar strategies and solutions for cities across the country; MEPR Agency, a Nashville-based communications and community engagement boutique that develops comprehensive, strategic, and inclusive communications; Pillars Development, LLC, a Nashville-based boutique real estate management firm that engages in all phases of development; and Spencer Rose Consulting, LLC, a woman-owned advisory firm that provides community- centered analysis and management solutions for mixed-used, mixed-income, mixed-finance public housing redevelopment and affordable housing development.

Building the UHS – Comprehensive Engagement & Analysis

The UHS was informed by input from various stakeholders, analysis of market trends, socioeconomic data, evaluation of programs and policies, and research on best practices from across the nation. The UHS builds upon existing studies and prior analyses, including a Market Value Analysis (MVA) - a data-based, field-validated examination of Nashville’s real-estate market, prepared by the Reinvestment Fund, and the Affordable Housing Task Force Report.

The development of the UHS began with an extensive community and stakeholder engagement process to ensure the plan was inclusive and reflective of community needs. Additional details on the community engagement process can be found in Appendix C: “UHS Development Community Engagement Summary.” This process included:

• Reviewing results from relevant, recent stakeholder engagement, including Imagine Nashville;

• Community listening sessions hosted in partnership with Community Ambassadors, organizations that serve and represent communities particularly affected by housing insecurity in Nashville;

• Roundtable discussions with practitioners, including housing developers and operators of various types (i.e. nonprofit, for-profit) and sizes, service providers, fair housing attorneys, researchers, and funders;

• Interviews with government officials and non-government practitioners;

• A public survey that ran from June to September 2024; and

• A technical committee of staff from numerous government and quasi-governmental entities that provided expert guidance.

Notably, over Summer 2024, the Housing Division and MEPR Agency hosted 12 community listening sessions to learn more about the unique housing journeys of our community. Four sessions were held that were open to all Nashville residents. As mentioned above, the Housing Division partnered with several community-based organizations – “UHS Community Ambassadors” – to hold listening sessions with an emphasis on hearing from communities that are disproportionately impacted by housing insecurity. Input from community listening sessions and the survey results will be included as appendices to the draft UHS.

Thanks to Metro’s partners, the Housing Division offered translated materials, including presentation materials, the public survey, and handouts, in Spanish, Arabic, and Swahili, ensuring broader accessibility for our diverse

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 9 Community

Practitioner

Public

Stakeholder

Technical Listening Sessions

Round Tables

Survey

Interviews

Committee 12

6

420+

26

4 Sessions

Round Tables

Responses

Interviews

Meetings

community. On-site translation and other accommodations were provided as requested at the listening sessions to enable all community members to fully participate.

A comprehensive housing needs assessment and market analysis was conducted in parallel with the stakeholder engagement process to understand the current state of Nashville’s housing market and both current and future housing needs. This analysis provided a clear picture of the gaps and opportunities within the housing market.

Next, an analysis was undertaken of Nashville’s prior plans, existing housing programs and policies, and housing ecosystem. Programs were analyzed for efficacy in achieving stated goals, possible gaps in service, and the potential for increasing impact. The analysis was based on review of existing reports and documents, including the Market Value Analysis and Affordable Housing Task Force Report, as well as interviews with program administrators, participants and partner organizations.

Finally, this strategy is informed by insights and tested practices from comparable jurisdictions. By integrating tested methods and cutting-edge approaches, the UHS aims to create a robust framework for addressing Nashville’s housing challenges and ensuring long-term housing security for all residents. The prominent themes from the community engagement and analyses are discussed further in the “Key Findings” section.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 10 Community Ambassador Organization Populations Served

AgeWell Middle Tennessee Older Adults

The Contributor People who are unhoused, including people who have

lived experience of being unhoused

Monroe Harding

Opportunity youth (ages 16-26) who may be homeless, housing insecure, or in subsidized housing

Nashville Organized for Action and Hope (NOAH)

Historically underserved communities, including low- income and low wage workers, individuals experiencing housing challenges, and African-Americans

Neighbor 2 Neighbor Neighborhood leaders and neighborhood associations

Stand Up Nashville Working Class

Tennessee Disability Coalition All Tennesseans with disabilities

Tennessee Immigrant and Refugee Rights Coalition (TIRRC)

Immigrants and Refugees

Urban League of Middle Tennessee

African-Americans and other historically underserved groups

Recent and Upcoming Housing Plans and Studies

The Unified Housing Strategy is intended to build on precedent plans and studies and inform those that may follow. These include the following:

• The Five-Year Consolidated Plan is submitted every five years to the UHS Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and is developed by MDHA on behalf of Metro. The purpose of the Five-Year Plan is to assess affordable housing needs, community development opportunities, and market conditions in Davidson County to establish data-driven priorities for the use of federal funds .

• 2021 Nashville Affordable Housing Task Force Report is the foundation that the UHS is building on. It lays out a series of actions, many of which have been implemented, and a longer-term vision for how Nashville’s capacity to create and preserve affordable homes might grow.

• Market Value Analysis (The Reinvestment Fund) served as initial research for the UHS and provides insight into market conditions and how different housing actions and programs might be targeted to the most appropriate neighborhoods.

• NashvilleNext is the general plan for Metro that provides the foundational values and vision that shape the UHS.

• The Metro-owned land report (EY) and Metro-Owned Land Steering Committee (ongoing) informed the development of Action 15: “Leverage publicly owned land portfolio by advancing infill development, co-location, and policy changes to ensure strong management of land assets” and is critical to its implementation.

• Imagine Nashville is the shared vision for the future of Nashville that informed the larger goals about the need for more homes to accommodate Nashville’s growing economy and long-term residents.

• Sustaining Nashville: Building Sustainability and Resilience into Affordable Housing (Urban Land Institute Nashville Technical Advisory Panel Report)

• Development Capacity Analysis Under Existing Zoning (forthcoming, Planning Department) and Metro Housing & Infrastructure Study (forthcoming, Planning Department) will be instrumental in Metro’s ability to advance Strategy C: “Create a range of new and affordable housing choices for all Nashvillians as appropriate across the county.”

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 11

Key Findings

The development of the Unified Housing Strategy was informed by a robust process of community engagement, stakeholder input, and comprehensive

Key Findings data analysis. From this process, six prominent themes emerged that highlight the key housing

• Increased Housing Demand challenges facing Nashville. These themes, outlined

• Lack of Affordability below, were echoed in both the community feedback and the data analysis, which combined deepened Nashville’s understanding of our housing needs and

• Lack of Housing Choice

• Inaccessibility of Homeownership

the broader housing landscape. This insight enables

• Risk of Housing Loss Nashville to develop strategies and actions tailored

• Difficulty Navigating Programs and Resources to the unique needs of those who call Nashville home.

Increased Housing Demand

Since 2012, Nashville’s growth in people and jobs has exceeded expectations forecasted in our general plan, NashvilleNext. This growth has put pressure on Nashville’s housing market. Despite robust housing growth, this pressure has overwhelmed what Nashville’s current approach to zoning and land use can accommodate.

The core driver of demand for living in Nashville is our strong economy and the opportunities it brings. The rate of job growth in Nashville has exceeded the country as a whole by a factor of almost 3:1 (33% from 2010 to 2023, compared with 13% for the U.S.). During this time, unemployment in Davidson County and Middle Tennessee declined to an astonishing low of 2.4%.2 Not only has Nashville seen strong job growth, the county’s economy has also shifted to higher wage jobs with increasing demand for highly educated workers. Beyond the increase of the number of homes needed, this also adds demand for higher cost homes, whether through larger home sizes, in higher demand locations, with greater amenities, or a combination of all three.

One way that this demand appears is through increased household formation. Household formation happens when a member of one household, such as an adult child living at home, leaves to start another, such as moving into their own apartment. Since the pandemic, household formation has increased, due to both higher incomes and to more people working from home. The average number of people living in each household in Nashville is now at its lowest recorded level. This means each unit is home to fewer people than ever before, which means our growing population needs more homes per person.

While the level of housing production in Nashville has been robust, it has not kept up with demand. In part, because new construction has largely been constrained to the most costly kinds of housing to build. Single family homes, especially those with larger lots, cost more due to the consumption of land and because of the utilities and infrastructure that must be built to serve new subdivisions. Meanwhile, dense multifamily construction in Downtown and Midtown have higher construction costs, both for the steel and concrete buildings themselves and the land on which the building is constructed. While new construction has responded to higher demand, this response has been incomplete and has not served households across different income levels as well as it could.

2 Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2010 – 2023.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 12

In the most extreme case, the supply of lower cost rental units (priced for households earning 30 – 60% of the Area Median Income ranging from $675 to $1,100 in 2023) dropped precipitously from 2010 to 2015 and has never recovered.3 During this time, moderately priced units “filtered upward” and became more expensive. In well- functioning housing markets, new homes are added for wealthier households and older homes gradually become more affordable over time. Over the last fifteen years, however, Nashville’s market shift has put pressure on these moderately priced units to become more expensive, removing the primary source of housing for low and moderate-income households.

At the same time, rapidly increasing home values have put ownership further and further out of reach for Nashvillians, with the cost of purchasing a home increasing faster than the incomes for renters who may be interested in purchasing a home. As amenities in Nashville continue to improve, many residents are finding themselves having to move further away from their jobs and the city’s center in search of affordable housing – often at the cost of longer commutes and reduced quality of life.

Prior job, population, and housing forecasts underestimated Nashville’s growth over the past 15 years. Because of the risk of underestimating future growth, the UHS developed an independent estimate of housing demand for Nashville over the next five and ten years. The UHS recommends that Nashville plan for sustained housing demand in line with recent trends. Based on national estimates of job sector growth, aligned with Nashville’s job base, the UHS estimates that Nashville needs 9,000 additional housing units per year (net housing creation after demolitions). Continuing to underestimate demand for homes in general and for ownership options in particular will continue to exacerbate the affordability concerns across income levels, and most especially the crisis for lower and moderate-income households

Lack of Affordability

Lack of housing affordability was identified as a primary concern across all stakeholder groups. Participants consistently pointed to the rising costs of both rental and homeownership opportunities, which are becoming increasingly out of reach for low- and moderate-income residents. Many community members expressed that they are struggling to secure housing that fits within their budgets, forcing difficult trade offs between housing costs and other essential needs, such as food and healthcare.

These sentiments are reflected in the most recent data showing the changes in housing prices over time compared to the median household income. As shown in Figure 2, rents in Davidson County have grown faster than incomes over the past five years leading to reduced affordability overall. Affordability challenges are most acute for households without a college degree who face more than a $600 gap between the average rent and what they can afford to pay.

3 Source: U.S. Census American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year; Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Matthew Sobek, Daniel Backman, Annie Chen, Grace Cooper, Stephanie Richards, Renae Rogers, and Megan Schouweiler. IPUMS USA: Version 15.0. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2024/ U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (30%, 50%, 60%, and 80% calculations); Tennessee Housing Development Agency (75% and 100% calculations)

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 13 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Figure 2: Rental Affordability by Cohort in Davidson County

Source: Zillow, American Community Survey (ACS) 5- Year; Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Matthew Sobek, Daniel Backman, Annie Chen, Grace Cooper, Stephanie Richards, Renae Rogers, and Megan Schouweiler (IPUMS US: Version 15.0, Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2024.

In addition to housing prices, another key measure of housing affordability is cost- burdened data. A household is considered cost burdened when more than 30% of their household income is spent on housing costs.

Across Nashville, renters are cost burdened at higher rates compared to homeowners. According to Census data, in 2023, 49% of all renters in Nashville were cost burdened compared to 22% of homeowners. However, when looking at the cost burden rate of homeowners broken down by income bracket the story is more nuanced. In 2022, nearly 50% of Nashville homeowners earning less than $50,000 a year were cost burdened. Moreover, between 2017 and 2022, the percentage of homeowners cost burdened earning $50-75,000 increased by nearly 15 percent. The data suggests that households earning higher incomes are not immune from housing unaffordability.

Across both homeowners and renters, certain cohorts, including seniors, single- parent households, and Black and Brown households, were cost burdened at higher rates. According to Census data, an alarming 74% of single-parent household renters are cost-burdened. In several of the listening sessions, single parents shared challenges affording rent alongside other necessary expenses. The data also revealed the uneven impacts of housing prices on minority communities. Black and Hispanic/Latino renters are also cost burdened at higher rates with 54% of Black households and 52% of Hispanic households being cost burdened compared to 47% of white households. While owners generally have lower cost burdens than renters, Hispanic owners have higher cost burdens than their white and Black counterparts (29% compared with 21% and 22%, respectively). Finally, Black (39%) and Hispanic households (37%) are much less likely to be homeowners than white households (62%).

While the data provides valuable insights, it does not fully capture the complex intersections of populations facing high levels of cost burden. This was especially evident in the listening sessions where personal stories highlighted these overlaps. For example, during a listening session hosted in partnership with AgeWell, older adult residents shared the unique financial constraints faced by those caring for young children, underscoring the compounded pressures many in this group experience.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 14 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Figure 3: Comparison of Homeowner Cost Burden Rate by Income Bracket

Source: U.S. Census American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year; Steven Ruggles, Sarah flood, Matthew Sobek, Daniel Backman, Annie Chen, Grace Cooper, Stephanie Richards, Renae Rogers, and Megan Schouwiler. IPUMS USA: Version 15.0. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2024.

“I would like to continue to live in Nashville, but the cost of housing and other necessities has me considering moving to another county which would increase my commute time and gas expense.”

Figure 4: Renter and Owner Cost Burden by Cohort (2022)

Source: U.S. Census American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year; Steven Ruggles, Sarah flood, Matthew Sobek, Daniel Backman, Annie Chen, Grace Cooper, Stephanie Richards, Renae Rogers, and Megan Schouwiler. IPUMS USA: Version 15.0. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2024.

Housing pricing is influenced by a variety of factors, including the supply compared to the demand. The Unified Housing Strategy seeks to address the factors inhibiting housing affordability and strives to reduce the number of households cost burdened across the city.

Lack of Housing Choice

During the community listening sessions, participants were asked about their housing needs and priorities. Interestingly, when the facilitator posed the question, “What do you want in your housing?” The response was often met with a noticeable silence. This pause, lasting several moments, highlighted a significant underlying issue: many community members had become so accustomed to prioritizing the affordability of housing that they struggled to articulate broader housing needs. It often took multiple follow-up questions to encourage participants to express their desires and priorities beyond price point. This pattern underscored a critical theme that emerged across all listening sessions: the lack of housing choice in the community.

The financial constraints imposed by rising rents and limited affordable housing options has led community members to focus almost exclusively on cost, often at the expense of other critical housing factors such as safety, space, maintenance, and community amenities. This narrow focus on price reflected a larger reality for many: the concept of “choice” in housing had been largely reduced to finding a place that could be afforded, rather than one that met all of their needs.

Though lack of choice was shared by many in our community, the choices for certain populations are more severely limited. For example, several particularly vulnerable groups in the community, including individuals with a history of incarceration, shared their difficult experience trying to access safe, stable housing. Despite many of these individuals having non-violent convictions or offenses that occurred decades ago, the stigma of their criminal records continued to present significant barriers to housing. Even when individuals were otherwise qualified for housing, landlords and property managers often rejected them outright based on background checks. Additionally, individuals with specific mobility-related disabilities shared the challenges with finding housing that met their accessibility needs. One participant who is a wheelchair user shared that her current housing had plumbing issues that triggered her to look elsewhere. Her housing search involved countless hours riding around on the bus and looking at listings yet coming up with no housing leads. Finding housing that was in close proximity to transit and provided the necessary accommodations proved to be particularly challenging.

As revealed in these individual stories, a lack of housing choice can lead to living in substandard conditions. Reports from community members described living situations that included hazardous conditions such as persistent mold, faulty plumbing, and unreliable heating or cooling systems. Many residents in substandard housing were either unaware of or hesitant to use formal mechanisms for reporting unsafe living conditions, such as filing a code complaint. Many participants expressed fear of retaliation from landlords if they were to raise concerns about the condition of their housing. There was a widespread fear that speaking up would result in eviction, further displacement, and a continued lack of housing options.

The limited housing choices expressed in the listening sessions is validated by the data. Despite our progress in housing production, Nashville’s housing supply has not kept up with demand and this is particularly true for low- to moderate-income individuals. Additionally, when analyzing the housing that has been produced over the last few years, the type of housing most commonly produced does not fully align with our community’s needs in terms of price, type, and tenure (i.e. rental or ownership). For example, much of our housing supply gains have been

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 15 “I would really just love and be thankful for an opportunity to give my kids their own place with their own rooms in a peaceful home. I live with my parents but it’s not the best for me or my kids but I have no choice. Please do something to help us single moms trying to provide a better life for our kids! Affordable rent is what we need.”

“My mother-in-law is going to be looking to move soon, and she will struggle to find housing that will accommodate her declining mobility. She will need a single-story house or condo, and these seem hard to find, especially in the neighborhoods she would prefer to live in… Accessibility is an issue that I don’t hear discussed often in the affordable housing conversation, but it is important for policy makers to consider.”

Figure located in the downtown core where the

5: Supply and Demand for Homes with 3+ Bedrooms by AMI cost to build is high and in turn results in often high rents.

A geographical analysis of our affordable housing, both income-restricted housing and naturally occurring affordable housing, also reveals the lack of geographic diversity in where affordable housing is currently located. Much of the naturally occurring affordable housing stock is located outside of the urban core in Antioch, Madison, and Donelson. Moreover, income-restricted housing tends to be clustered in certain areas of the city, with a high percentage of homes

Source: U.S. Census American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year; Steven Ruggles, Sarah flood, Matthew Sobek, Daniel Backman, Annie Chen, Grace Cooper, Stephanie Richards, Renae Rogers, and Megan Schouwiler. IPUMS USA: Version 15.0. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2024. located far north and south of downtown. This analysis suggests the need to further affordable housing development in more geographically diverse neighborhoods with an emphasis on prioritizing areas of opportunity.

Additionally, there remains a lack of choice for larger families needing homes with three or more bedrooms. As indicated in Figure 5, the number of rental homes with 3 or more bedrooms has not kept up with the demand particularly for households earning less than 50% of the Area Median Income. Figure 6 further shows that while most households that are cost burdened are individuals living alone, most people who are living in cost-burdened households have four or more people. Figure 6 shows the number of households at each household size that are cost burdened in green, alongside the number of residents living in cost-burdened households in blue. Providing more housing options priced affordably is only one part of the story. To provide more robust housing choice, Metro must commit to advancing housing options that are geographically diverse, accessible, accommodate smaller and larger families, and encourage holistic tenant application reviews.

Figure 6: Number of Cost Burdened Households by Household Size

Source: U.S. Census American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year; Steven Ruggles, Sarah flood, Matthew Sobek, Daniel Backman, Annie Chen, Grace Cooper, Stephanie Richards, Renae Rogers, and Megan Schouwiler. IPUMS USA: Version 15.0. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2024.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 16

Inaccessibility of Homeownership

Related to lack of housing choice, a theme also emerged highlighting growing barriers to homeownership, which has become increasingly inaccessible for many Nashvillians, particularly first-time home buyers. In community listening sessions, many participants shared their frustration with the rising costs of purchasing a home in the city. Despite a strong desire to settle down and build families within Nashville, these would-be homeowners found themselves priced out of the market. Limited inventory and skyrocketing prices have created a situation where buying a home in the city is no longer a feasible option for many, particularly for young families and individuals looking to enter the housing market. As a result, some began to consider leaving Nashville altogether, seeking more affordable living in nearby communities, a painful choice for those who have long considered the city their home.

At the same time, older adult homeowners voiced their concerns about being “stuck” in homes that no longer suit their needs, either due to physical limitations or the high cost of relocation. Many expressed a desire to downsize or find a more accessible property, but the financial burden of moving—whether due to high home prices, insufficient market options, or the cost of maintenance—left them feeling trapped. For some, the homes they’ve lived in for decades have become increasingly difficult to maintain, both financially and physically, as they age. There is growing anxiety among older adults about the lack of viable options to age in place or transition to a more suitable living situation without financial hardship. This disconnect between what is available in the housing market and the diverse needs of Nashville’s residents is contributing to a sense of uncertainty about the future for many.

Recent data on homeownership mirrors what was shared in the listening sessions. Although affordable homeownership has historically been an advantage for Davidson County, home values have risen 40% since 2019 while incomes grew by only 19%, increasingly pushing ownership out of reach for households earning below $100K. Existing homeowners are also under pressure. The county is losing owner households earning below $75K, and cost burden rates are rising across all income levels.4 This is driven in part by the fact that the vast majority (91%) of homeownership units added in the market in recent years are single family, which are generally more costly to build and therefore delivered at a higher price point, and by an influx of higher-income buyers.5

As shown in Figure 7, home values now exceed what is affordable to the median household in Davidson County. There is more than a $90,000 gap between the average home value ($421,722) and the price affordable to the median household in 2023 ($329,962). Since 2019, homeownership affordability has deteriorated rapidly, driven by rising interest rates, increased home prices, and a lower overall supply of existing and new homes available for sale.

4 American Community Survey (2017, 2022).

5 Redfin (May 2024).

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 17 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Figure 7: Davidson County Home Affordability

Source: Zillow; US. Census American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year; Steven Ruggles, Sarah flood, Matthew Sobek, Daniel Backman, Annie Chen, Grace Cooper, Stephanie Richards, Renae Rogers, and Megan Schouwiler. IPUMS USA: Version 15.0. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2024.

“My spouse is becoming increasingly disabled. We are going to need a ramp, and perhaps wider doorways and a walk in shower. This may be a few years off, but I think about those issues and while I know we need to plan ahead, I find it difficult to do that. We bought this house when it was in foreclosure over 10 years ago. It has more than tripled in value since we bought it. We don’t owe a lot. However, the amount we need for insurance and taxes totals more than the payments on the principal….Selling and buying another smaller, more disability friendly home does not seem possible. While we might get a great price on this house, how would we afford a new one?”

Despite considerable gains in median income (estimated to reach $82,000 by 2024), only one in three homes is affordable to the median household (1,862 homes). As of May 2024, across the entire county, there were only 350 homeownership listings on Redfin affordable to the median household.

While homeownership has become increasingly difficult for a growing number of Nashvillians, data suggests that barriers to homeownership for certain groups persist. As Figure 8 reveals, homeownership rates for Black and Hispanic families are significantly lower compared to white families. Moreover, the median household income of Hispanic and Black families continues to be lower than white families posing additional barriers to affording homeownership opportunities. Analysis of Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data found that even at higher incomes, racial disparities persist. The highest white income borrower had a mortgage origination rate of 72% compared to just 56% for Black borrowers.6 Furthermore, Black households are more likely to be denied a loan for their mortgage. Debt to income ratio is the leading cause of denials with the second highest cause being credit history.

Homeownership remains a primary pathway to wealth generation, offering families the opportunity to build wealth and financial stability over time. For many, particularly those that have historically been excluded from economic opportunities, homeownership serves as a crucial tool for closing the wealth gap. Elevating the focus on homeownership within the UHS is vital because it empowers individuals and families to build economic mobility and long-term stability.

Figure 8: Incomes, Ownership Rates, Home Values, and Maximum Affordable Home Values by Race and Ethnicity Median values for each category are shown for major race/ethnic groups in Nashville. The maximum affordable home value reflects three times that group’s median household income, an approximate measure of home affordability used in the Market Value Analysis.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (2023; 1-year estimates).

6 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (2023), Aggregated Across Lenders

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 18

Risk of Housing Loss

The market pressures and affordability challenges described throughout contribute to the theme of risk of housing loss. Both homeowners and renters shared concerns about losing their home – either through forced housing loss, such as eviction, or through economic pressures, and being forced to move to a different neighborhood or even outside of the city.

According to data produced by the Eviction Lab through March 2024, eviction filings in Davidson County in the past year were up nearly 45% compared to pre-pandemic averages. Looking at April 2023 through March 2024, February 2024 saw the highest eviction filings at 1,478.7 The filing rate is the ratio of the number of evictions filed in an area over the number of renter-occupied homes in that area. Notably, not all households filed with an eviction will ultimately be forced to leave their home, and current available eviction data does not include the reason for such filings. Regardless of these limitations, the increase in the filing rate suggests that there is a growing need for interventions to mitigate and prevent evictions. As was shared in the listening sessions, an eviction judgment not only results in the immediate trauma of needing to find a new home but has lasting impacts. Eviction proceedings can become part of a tenant’s housing record, even in cases in which the tenant wins, so households experiencing eviction have greater difficulty finding future housing that is both safe and affordable. Participants shared first-hand experience with the difficulties finding housing after an eviction, the impact on employment opportunities, and the detriments to their physical and mental health further emphasizing the urgent need to address displacement.

While evictions are a forced type of displacement, displacement can also occur for both homeowners and renters through economic pressures as housing costs rise and/or property is redeveloped. The Reinvestment Fund’s Market Value Analysis (MVA), which included a Displacement Risk Ratio (DRR) helped us to better understand where housing loss may be most acute across the city. The DRR compares changing residential sales prices over time with the inflation-adjusted median income of residents at a fixed starting point. The ratio is a test of whether the typical household living there at the outset could afford to buy a home there at a later time. A score of 3.0 is considered unaffordable and a negative value, which can result from the index’s adjustment for citywide price trends, indicates deep affordability. As can be seen on the maps above, areas with highest and modest

7 Eviction Tracking System: Version 2.0. Princeton: Princeton University, 2020. www.evictionlab.org

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 19 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Source: Reinvestment Fund. NOTE: Grey and purple markets are considered strong markets with minimal signs of distress. Grey markets have large, well- maintained properties with highest home values, and purple markets are a mix of owner and renter neighborhoods with above average prices.

Figure 10: High Displacement Risk Areas

Figure 9: Displacement Risk Ratio, 2021-2022

Source: Reinvestment Fund

pressure are generally located north and south of the downtown core. Notably, the Reinvestment Fund found that the proportion of block groups with DRR values over 3.0 has grown sharply since 2015.

Generally, the MVA found that housing demand across the county was such that the majority of neighborhoods were strong enough to attract private investments on their own. Furthermore, “there is a strong need in Davidson County to relieve, rather than stimulate, the investment pressure in the county’s weakest housing markets. New development in these areas often leads to loss of older and more moderately priced homes and the creation of new, more expensive housing that is priced out of reach of the typical long-term neighborhood residents or other families with similar incomes.”

These findings suggest the strong need to have related strategies and actions that address the risk of housing loss through creating new housing opportunities in existing strong markets, preserving existing affordable housing, improving coordination and delivery of services, and utilizing the full array of housing security tools,such as home repair and property tax assistance programs, in vulnerable areas to avoid market-related displacement. See the Program Utilization section on page 37 to learn how current tools can be used to avoid market-related displacement. Further, Metro has the ability to implement strong mechanisms to protect housing security in projects it funds.

Difficulty Navigating Programs & Resources

One of the final themes that emerged from the community engagement sessions was the significant difficulty residents face when navigating housing resources and programs. Despite Metro offering a variety of assistance programs for individuals facing housing insecurity - such as emergency rental assistance, the Eviction Right to Counsel program, and the property tax freeze program - many community members were unaware of these resources or found them difficult to access. There is no singular, centralized place where individuals can easily access information or receive guidance about the resources they need, and for those who did know about them, the process was often slow, confusing, and discouraging.

Many individuals who had successfully accessed resources did so through their personal networks— family members, friends, or neighbors who were familiar with the programs. However, for those without these personal connections, the process of finding help was much more difficult. It often involved making numerous phone calls to various agencies, which became time-consuming and frustrating. The sheer number of agencies and the lack of coordination between them meant that people often spent hours, if not days, just trying to identify the appropriate point of contact. This was particularly problematic for those experiencing housing crises or homelessness, as the mental and emotional toll of such situations made it even more challenging to navigate this complex web of resources.

A powerful example shared during the community engagement sessions highlighted the frustration with this fragmentation. An advocate, working to assist a tenant who had lost their income following the March 2020 tornado, reached out to 15 local nonprofits, two government agencies, one state agency, and several churches in an attempt to secure housing assistance. This exhausting search for support is a clear indication of the time- intensive nature of navigating housing resources. In a housing crisis, where time is often of the essence, being able to quickly access necessary support is crucial to mitigating further harm. Therefore, it is clear that more education,

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 20 “I have reached out to numerous resources throughout Davidson County, (including the Disaster Recovery Connection, Urban Housing Solutions, Affordable Housing Resources, Nashville Conflict Resolution Center, MDHA (applied for two properties), TDHA, Rooftop, NeedLink, Project Connect, Martha O’Bryan Center, Catholic Charities, Metro Action Commission, the Community Resource Center, Legal Aid Society, West Nashville Dream Center, St. Luke’s Community House, the Community Foundation, Second Harvest, and several local churches). My housing search has been very slow and difficult. There seems to be a long process with no time frame. I have no idea on waitlist procedures. Please improve the application processes and give more options for safe and affordable housing.”

marketing of available resources, and the creation of a cohesive, easy-to-navigate system are essential to ensure individuals facing housing insecurity can get the help they need without unnecessary delays or confusion.

How Much Housing Do We Need?

The development of the UHS involved an updated demand analysis. This section elaborates on the findings shared under the “Increased Housing Demand” theme and provides additional information on the overall housing needs, both market-rate and affordable housing, prepared by the UHS team.

Overall Housing Needs

HR&A Advisors provided estimates on how many new homes Nashville could anticipate needing over the next 10 years. This involved estimating how many people would like to live in Nashville or the residential demand. HR&A estimated that by 2034, Nashville could see a residential demand of 175,000 additional residents – driving the need for an increase in new housing over the next 10 years. They based these estimates on job growth, analyzing past employment data from sources like the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). To estimate housing needs, HR&A forecasted job growth by industry and used these forecasts to predict income and demographic details, such as age, sex, and household size. They then applied data from the Census and other sources to project how households would form, accounting for both natural population growth and migration. From this and assuming a healthy vacancy rate, HR&A estimated that the county will need over 90,000 new homes in the next ten years. This translates to an annual production goal of around 9,000 new homes. (The full methodology and data sources can be found in Appendix B: “Methodologies, Data Sources, and Case Studies”.) This is not a prediction of what will happen or an exact target that must be met. Instead, it is intended to help Metro anticipate how much housing people may seek in Nashville over the next ten years.

HR&A further estimated that there may be demand for over half of these new homes to be for sale, as opposed to for rent. If future demand reflects the tenure preferences of recent in-movers, about 56% of the 90,000 new homes created would need to be homeownership opportunities. As shown in Figure 11, the availability of homes for-sale in Nashville has been well below what is considered a healthy supply since the years following the Great Recession. The opposite is true for Nashville’s rental supply which has seen significant gains in recent years largely due to dense construction in Downtown and Midtown. The shift to a majority of new homes being for-sale will accommodate the preference and capacity for homeownership and would reflect a significant shift in the tenure of homes being built.

This forecast of housing demand reflects the overall market, including both private development, subsidized non-profit and for-profit developments, and public- private partnerships. Most new housing demand will be met by the private market, without subsidy for income restrictions. As portrayed in

Figure 11: Supply Availability of Owners and Renters

Source: Rental vacancy rate; CoStar, Stabilized Vacancy Rate, Multifamily, Davidson County. Owner inventory: GNAR, Market Research. https://www.greaternashvillerealtors.org/pages/market-data- news/

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 21 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Figure 12, this demand estimate is higher than housing growth since 2015 (an average of 7,000 additional units per year), but lower than the spike in construction since the pandemic (more than 14,000 units per year).

Affordable Housing Needs

The analysis also took into account different income levels and household types to inform the scale, type, and tenure of affordable housing needed over the next decade. As shown below in Figure 13, Nashville faces the biggest rental housing gaps for households earning 30% of the Area Median Income (AMI, an official measure of income relative to the housing market as a whole) or below. While there appears to be a better balance between housing supply and demand for households earning 50% of the AMI or above, the shortage of affordable options for those earning 50% AMI or below creates a ripple effect. Many households in the lowest income brackets are forced to rent homes that are priced for higher income levels, which in turn limits the availability of affordable rental housing for households earning 60% of the AMI or below. The situation constrains the supply of rental homes across multiple income brackets, making it harder for low and moderate-income households to find suitable and affordable housing. The greatest rental housing gaps are among the lowest-income households earning 30% of the AMI or below. Though there seems to be a greater balance between the number of homes and households when looking at 50% of the AMI and above, the shortage of supply for households earning 50% AMI or below means a sizable number of households earning up to 50% AMI are having to rent in housing that is beyond what they can afford, further straining the supply of rental homes affordable to households earning 60% of the AMI or below.

While Figure 13 shows 2023 data, Figure 14 reveals how the supply and demand across incomes has evolved over time. Figure 14 shows the number of units affordable for households earning between 30-60% of the area median income, declining sharply from 70,000 homes to 43,000 homes.

Figure 12: Annual Growth in Housing Units

Source:U.S. Census. American Community Survey (1-yr; 2010 – 2019 and 2021 – 2023); Decennial Census (2020)

Figure 13: Rental Housing Gaps

Source: U.S. Census American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year; Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Matthew Sobek, Daniel Backman, Annie Chen, Grace Cooper, Stephanie Richards, Renae Rogers, and Megan Schouweiler. IPUMS USA: Version 15.0. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2024/ U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (30%, 50%, 60%, and 80% calculations); Tennessee Housing Development Agency (75% and 100% calculations)

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 22

At the same time, the number of more expensive homes rose sharply – from 18,000 to 35,000 homes for those earning between 60% and 80% of AMI, and from 8,000 to 35,000 homes for those earning between 80% and 100% of AMI. This likely reflects older units becoming more expensive due to an overall lack of supply.

Figure 14: The Supply of Rentals Affordable by Income Level The middle three panels show change in homes available at each income level, primarily due to rent changes (filtering). While these panels show excess supply (more homes than households), excess demand (more households than homes) in the first and last panels rolls up and down to absorb this. In the process, households who earn below 30% of the Area Median Income (AMI) become cost burdened. Households earning more than 100% of AMI put pressure on lower rents to rise

Source: U.S. Census American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year; Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Matthew Sobek, Daniel Backman, Annie Chen, Grace Cooper, Stephanie Richards, Renae Rogers, and Megan Schouweiler. IPUMS USA: Version 15.0. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2024/ U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (30%, 50%, 60%, and 80% calculations); Tennessee Housing Development Agency (75% and 100% calculations)

Taking into account the demand for affordable rental housing compared to the existing inventory and recent deliveries of rental housing by AMI level, HR&A estimated that Nashville would benefit from adding an additional 20,000 homes affordable to households earning 60% of the AMI or below over the next 10 years, with a particular focus on prioritizing homes for those earning 50% AMI or below and especially for those earning 30% AMI or below.

As described in the “Lack of Housing Choice” section, producing housing that is priced affordably is not sufficient in addressing the housing needs of our community. Figure 5 in the “Lack of Housing Choice” section revealed the need for more rental homes with 3 or more bedrooms for households earning 50% of the Area Median Income. Conversely, additional data has also shown the need for studio or one-bedroom apartments especially for individuals experiencing chronic homelessness. In evaluating policy and program changes, Metro shall strive to encourage development of affordable housing that provides more robust housing choice.

Notably, over the last few years, Nashville has largely been on track to produce around 2,000 affordable units per year. Figure 15 shows the number of affordable housing units that have been funded since 2016 using just local tools. In FY 2022, 2023, and 2024, over 1,800 affordable housing units (deduplicated) were funded for

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 23 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

preservation or new construction. Thanks to the influx of ARPA dollars and the creation of new tools, Nashville has seen significant gains in its affordable housing production since FY 2016. Maintaining high levels of production, however, will be partially dependent on market factors and the continued financial support from private, federal, state, and local partners.

Figure 15: Affordable Housing Units Funded Since 2016

Source: Metro Housing Division. Note: Units may have been supported by more than one program. The unduplicated count is 14,093 units.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 24 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Ecosystem, Resource, and Regulatory Analyses

In addition to the community engagement and market analysis, the UHS team conducted a comprehensive ecosystem, resource, and regulatory analysis to further inform the development of UHS strategies and actions. This multi-faceted analysis aimed to provide a deeper understanding of the broader housing landscape, identifying the key players, available resources, and existing regulatory frameworks that shape the housing environment. By examining these critical components, the team was able to uncover key insights and challenges that directly impact the accessibility and effectiveness of housing support systems, including potential duplicative efforts and resource gaps. Below, we outline the summaries and key takeaways from these essential analyses:

Ecosystem Analysis

A housing ecosystem is comprised of the key actors working across the housing continuum, from homelessness to subsidized rental and homeownership housing to market rate housing.

Source: Tennessee Housing Development Agency

These actors include non- and for-profit developers, service providers, advocates, government agencies, funders such as lenders and philanthropies, and landowners. A high-functioning ecosystem is necessary to achieve the housing strategies outlined in the UHS as no single entity, industry sector, or resource can address the magnitude and complexity of the issue alone. To create a high functioning ecosystem, Nashville will need to strengthen alignment and coordination among key housing actors, grow essential capacities and expertise, and optimize and leverage existing housing resources, as well as grow new ones.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 25

Service Public Sector Owners/Developers Lenders/Funders Providers Advocates The public sector

Developers create sets and administers

and preserve policy, deploys

housing across the funding, and

income spectrum. coordinates the

They may be larger ecosystem.

nonprofits, for profits, or public.

Note: These are broad categories of actors intended to highlight the key roles in a housing ecosystem. Many individual organizations and agencies fulfill multiple roles, such as nonprofit developers that also provide services. There also may be organizations that do not neatly align with these categories, but nevertheless are key actors in the housing ecosystem, such as property managers that are not owners or developers.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 26 Lenders such as banks and funders such as philanthropy and CDFIs finance housing development and fund services providers.

Service providers offer support across the housing spectrum, from homeownership counseling to emergency assistance.

Advocates organize for change, hold other actors accountable, and bring community voices to the table.

Public Sector

High-functioning housing ecosystems require strong public sector actors. Critically, the public sector must maintain the capabilities to effectively set policy, deploy resources, monitor those resources after deployment, and bring new resources into the ecosystem through expertise and strong communication and partnerships. Coordination and alignment between key housing actors is essential to ecosystem effectiveness, the efficient deployment of public resources, and advancing a city’s housing goals. In peer cities, overall policy direction and coordination is usually delegated to a single agency. For example:

Atlanta, GA: A strong mayor jurisdiction like Nashville, the Chief Policy Officer (CPO) in the Mayor’s Office is responsible for aligning key actors around the mayor’s housing goals. The CPO and their staff regularly convene executive leadership of other key housing agencies including the planning department and the housing authority.

Austin, TX: In Austin, the Housing Department reports directly to the city manager who oversees the executive agencies. The direct reporting structure supports alignment on housing goals and priorities. The Housing Department also has broad control over the city’s housing resources through the Austin Housing Finance Corporation, which increases the agency’s power.

Charlotte, NC: In Charlotte, the Department of Housing and Neighborhood Services is largely responsible for coordinating other housing actors with direction from the mayor. Like in Austin, the department controls the Housing Trust Fund and other key resources.

Denver, CO: The mayor of Denver appointed senior policy advisors to bring the Department of Housing Stability, Department of Human Services, and Department of Community Planning and Development into alignment around ambitious new homelessness goals for the consolidated city-county metro government.

Washington, DC: In DC, a strong mayor jurisdiction that both set and achieved ambitious housing goals, the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development (DMPED) oversees all key housing agencies including the housing authority and the housing finance agency.

In Nashville, however, there is no single person or agency tasked with providing leadership or coordinating housing activities, and lines of authority overseeing resources are fragmented. The Housing Division was created in 2022 following the recommendations of the Affordable Housing Task Force. This action consolidated oversight of some key programs, including the Barnes Fund, under one roof, and led to the creation of new tools. The Office of Homelessness Services coordinates the homelessness response, while Metro Social Services, the Metro Action Commission, and the Courts offer housing-related services and interventions. However, MDHA is responsible for many of the other housing activities such as administration of federal entitlement programs on behalf of Metro Nashville, voucher programs, the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Payment in Lieu of Taxes (LIHTC PILOT) program, and a large housing portfolio. In addition, MDHA has tax increment financing (TIF) authority in redevelopment districts and transit-oriented redevelopment districts. Both the Industrial Development Board (IDB) and the newly created East Bank Development Authority (EBDA) have TIF authority. Metro Government, MDHA, the IDB, Health and Education Facilities Board (HEFB), and the EBDA have bond authority. Currently, there is no overarching policy requirement, alignment, or coordination of these resources to advance Nashville’s housing goals within and beyond Metro government. See Appendix D: “Housing Agency Overviews” for an overview of public and quasi-public entity housing functions.

The ecosystem analysis, further informed by comparative research and stakeholder engagement, revealed several areas where there are gaps in responsibility or opportunity to improve clarity about agency roles. These include the following:

• Fragmentation and coordination: Nashville’s housing ecosystem is fragmented, without a clear lead for setting housing policy and ensuring relevant entities, including those with responsibility related to but beyond housing, are working in concert to make progress toward housing goals. Decisions about specific allocations of particular resources are made in the absence of awareness of other resources or viable projects or how a project advances Nashville’s housing goals.

• Structure and coordination: The leaders of the local public entities with influence over housing resources have different governing authorities, such as independent boards and commissions, sometimes creating challenges to coordination when there is tension and disconnect about direction. This highlights the need for a unified structure that fosters collaboration and alignment to ensure greater transparency in the stewardship of public resources.

• Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH): Permanent supportive housing is the pathway to addressing homelessness through the provision of long-term affordable housing combined with supportive services and rental/operating assistance. In Nashville, each of these components are managed by three public agencies: OHS (homelessness response); Housing Division (housing development and preservation programs and policy); and MDHA (rental assistance). In addition, supportive services are delivered through partnerships with service providers. Therefore, creating PSH requires resources and expertise from multiple agencies and the responsibility for determining the approach to creating PSH needs to be defined, with a clear lead agency and formalized partnerships with other agencies.

• Resident outreach and resource centralization: Various resources are available to address residents’ housing needs, and they are administered by various agencies. While that is not inherently problematic, stakeholder engagement made clear that residents lack awareness of resources; agencies lack full awareness of who is responsible for which resources; outreach about resources could be more robust, targeted, and coordinated; and the resident experience of accessing resources needs to be easier and smoother.

• Developer community outreach and communication: To achieve its housing goals, Metro must rely on strong public-private partnerships. However, the development community expressed limited awareness of Metro’s priorities for housing and the tools that are available for affordable housing as well as needing support to access these tools.

• Fair Housing: Fair Housing violations continue to persist. Education of housing providers, the judicial system, and residents is needed, and capacity for education and addressing violations is limited.

• Data Tracking and Reporting: Housing programs are administered across multiple agencies and there lacks consistent protocols on what data is being collected and to whom it is being reported. Further, the Housing Division’s dashboard does not include data for all public housing-related programs despite a legislative requirement.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 27 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

• Capacity: Based on interviews with internal and external stakeholders and assessment of program administration practices, Nashville’s public sector housing ecosystem would benefit from strengthening the following capacities in order to more effectively attract, retain, and deploy housing resources:

◊ Underwriting,

◊ Federal/state policy and program expertise,

◊ Data management and analysis,

◊ Narrative development,

◊ Asset management systems and expertise,

◊ Monitoring and compliance systems.

Nashville is facing a challenging set of housing issues and it is necessary to scale up its capacity to match the challenges it faces. Strategy A: “Enhance and align Nashville’s housing ecosystem to comprehensive and collectively address Nashville’s housing needs” includes actions to strengthen the public sector role in Nashville’s housing ecosystem. A summary of several of these actions are outlined below.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 28 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Figure 16: Ecosystem Challenges, Solutions and Anticipated Results

Challenge Solutions Anticipated Results

No clear lead for setting housing policy and ensuring relevant entities are working in concert to advance progress toward housing goals.

Create a role in the Mayor’s Office to over-see and advance the policies and solutions facing Nashville’s housing and homelessness crisis (Action 1).

Create an interdepartmental leadership group to coordinate housing funding and services and execute MOUs with key public partners to formalize responsibilities and reporting requirements (Action 1a).

Position existing housing tools to align with UHS priorities (Action 12).

Housing partners will have more clarity on roles. Metro will be able to more efficiently advance progress, utilize resources, and capitalize on opportunities.

Limited ability to leverage non-housing agencies to advance progress toward housing objectives.

Create an interdepartmental leadership group to coordinate housing funding and services and execute MOUs with key public partners to formalize responsibilities and reporting requirements (Action 1a).

Metro will be able to more swiftly facilitate inter-agency collaboration to resolve challenges and leverage available tools (including subsidy, regulation, etc.) to maximize impact toward housing goals and objectives.

Decisions about specific allocations of particular resources are made in the absence of awareness of other resources or viable projects.

Coordinate request-for-proposals or intake processes for allocating resources and align reporting requirements (Action 5).

Metro will be able to better assess highest and best use of available resources.

Development community will have a streamlined point for accessing resources, resulting in a simpler process for accessing and increased awareness of available resources.

Lack of clarity about roles and responsibilities for developing Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH).

Develop a strategic plan for Permanent Supportive Housing to support annual creation of 900 PSH units for individuals experiencing or at risk of experiencing homelessness (Action 29).

The Mayor’s Office shall designate a lead agency to develop and implement a PSH strategic plan for Nashville and formalize roles among relevant Metro agencies and partners.

Residents lack awareness of resources, agencies lack full awareness of who is responsible for which resources, outreach about resources could be more robust, targeted and coordinated.

Strengthen and expand hubNashville to centralize and improve access to housing resources for residents (Action 41).

Ensure information about housing resources is easily accessible and translated into the most widely spoken languages in Nashville (Action 42).

Agencies will pursue coordinated out-reach and resources will be easier to find.

More residents in need of resources (financial, informational, etc.) will be able to take advantage, more easily.

Development community has limited awareness of Metro’s priorities for housing and the tools that are available for affordable housing and needs support to access these tools.

Continue support for development partners through streamlined reviews and increased communication and marketing (Action 4).

Enhance support of emerging developers and diverse business enterprises (Action 6).

Development community will be better equipped to address Nashville’s housing priorities.

Education of housing providers, the judicial system and residents is needed, and capacity for education and addressing violations is limited.

Support the Eviction Right to Counsel program (Action 36).

Support the Tennessee Fair Housing Council (Action 39).

Require recipients of public funds/incentives to participate in annual Fair Housing training (Action 40).

Residents, housing providers, and the justice system will be better attuned to policies and requirements, and incidence of discrimination and housing instability will lessen.

Nashville’s public sector housing ecosystem would benefit from strengthening capacity for underwriting, federal/state policy and program expertise, data management, analysis and related narrative development, asset management systems and expertise, monitoring and compliance systems.

Increase capacity and expertise of Metro agencies, either internally or through external partners (Action 2).

Establish underwriting capacity, requirements, and criteria to maximize public investments in housing (Action 11).

Metro will be better positioned to produce and preserve affordable housing and support residents’ housing stability.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 29

Private Sector

In addition to Metro and other public entities, the private sector plays an important role in addressing housing needs. Almost all affordable housing development and preservation is necessarily a public-private partnership, with contributions of both resources and expertise from the private and public sector necessary for successful affordable housing.

Key takeaways from mapping of ecosystem functions showed several trends.

In Nashville, nonprofit developers have advocated for new tools and policy changes and led the creation and preservation of affordable housing for decades, on their own and through partnerships with for-profit developers. In the 11 years of the Barnes Fund, nonprofits have leveraged $1 dollar of Metro funds with $9 of other funds, resulting in $1.4 billion in leveraged funds for $160 million in Barnes Fund grants that will result in over 6,000 new and preserved rental and for-sale homes. Despite these extraordinary outcomes, Nashville continues to have a deep deficit of affordable housing. Recognizing their critical role, nonprofits continue to champion affordable housing, with 10 longstanding nonprofit organizations forming the Alliance for an Affordable Nashville to collectively address issues and pursue solutions.

Nashville has a significant number of Community Development Corporations (CDCs), many with long histories of advancing important community development work in their neighborhoods and across Nashville. Because CDCs are deeply rooted in the communities they serve, they play a vital role in tailoring housing solutions to local needs. The capacity and business model of these organizations vary, with some focusing more on services and dabbling in development or rehabilitation to cover costs, while others are equipped to take on sophisticated for- sale and Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) development projects. As Nashville seeks to scale its housing supply, strengthening capacities of CDCs not only leads to the creation and preservation of affordable housing but to the economic stability of communities.

Many nonprofit developers in Nashville are also service providers, offering financial education, counseling, childcare, and other forms of support to households. While this can result in more holistically serving an individual or family, it can also stretch resources thin. Because nonprofits often rely on grants and donations for both development and services, they often find themselves with funding constraints to sufficiently support their efforts and in competition with other nonprofit developers and services providers for the same funding.

While Nashville has local affordable housing developers, it has attracted few national affordable housing developers to the market. Local developers have a strong track record, but a market of Nashville’s size will require additional capacity in order to address the scale of the need. Based on interviews, the lack of national partners appears to be in part because local public funding is largely awarded to nonprofits and in part because the State of Tennessee’s Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) scoring process benefits developers with pre-existing experience developing LIHTC in Tennessee. Another challenge has been the historically limited engagement by Metro with national nonprofits to date. National nonprofits bring additional capacity and funding with them to projects and can expand Nashville’s capacity to build affordable homes and advance unique models.

Metropolitan Development and Housing Agency (MDHA) is in the process of engaging a national affordable housing developer to partner with it on the redevelopment of one of its housing sites. A strong and balanced partnership between a housing authority and a private developer can bring additional capital and capacity to the table to move the redevelopment of MDHA’s housing portfolio along at a faster pace. MDHA is taking the right approach to partnership and that will help build capacity in Nashville.

Private sector actors are primarily active in the production of new market-rate homeownership opportunities and high-rise multi-family housing, although the magnitude of involvement may differ by actor type. While these efforts contribute to increasing overall housing supply, tools and policies to expand building typologies and create mixed-income housing would allow Nashville to better scale production and achieve affordability goals.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 30 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Private sector actors have limited involvement in homelessness activities outside of service provision. Private sector partners play an essential role in operating shelters and providing services; however, the private sector has been slow in creating permanent housing options for persons experiencing homelessness. This is largely attributed to the lack of resources to make these projects viable, such as ongoing rental/operational assistance and supportive services. Additionally, the lack of affordable long-term skilled for residents with more intense needs puts pressure on service providers. Recently, private sector partners have begun including some permanent supportive housing in new construction projects and converting motels to housing with the influx of ARPA funds. Motel conversions for PSH is a faster and more financially feasible option than new construction.

While Nashville has strong regional Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), no national CDFI currently has an office based in Nashville, which may limit Nashville’s ability to access federal programs and capital. National CDFIs partner with national funders and capital partners which could bring additional, innovative funding to Nashville. CDFIs often act as intermediaries, providing avenues for communities to tap into federal resources to affordable housing and economic development. Further CDFIs can attract significant private investment. According to the CDFI Coalition, CDFIs leverage over $12 in private capital for every $1 in federal support. In addition, national CDFIs could expand the utilization of New Market Tax Credits (NMTCs) in Nashville, which are underutilized in the area. Working across markets and implementing products and programs across the country can also bring much needed expertise on emerging best practices. Enterprise Community Partners has hired a policy staff person focused on Tennessee and based in Nashville, which is a step toward a larger presence, but a larger presence of national CDFIs could bridge resource gaps.

Corporate and philanthropic participation in affordable housing is not as robust as in other markets, despite investments from the Amazon Equity Fund in local projects and investments in the Catalyst Fund led by the Community Foundation. Stakeholder interviews and research into peer jurisdictions revealed that the network of corporate and philanthropic investment in Nashville is less robust than in high-capacity housing ecosystems. This may be due in part to a lack of an overall housing strategy to identify areas where corporate and philanthropic investments have the most impact. Because public sources are constrained, drawing more philanthropic investment to meet Nashville’s housing objectives, urging new and existing developers to explore more creative financing, and proactively designing new public-private partnerships are necessary for building capacity in the ecosystem.

There are several examples of how local governments in other places have effectively engaged corporate, philanthropic, and CDFI partners to collaboratively address housing and expand ecosystem capacity.

• Flexible rental subsidy: The Los Angeles County Flexible Housing Subsidy Pool (FHSP) is a permanent rental subsidy program that provides flexible rental subsidies alongside ongoing Intensive Case Management Services (ICMS) for people with complex health needs, including physical and behavioral health conditions, who are frequently heavy utilizers of county medical services. The FHSP was launched in 2014 through a partnership of the LA County Department of Health Services (DHS), the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation, and other governmental partners, in order to supplement existing federal and local housing subsidies and programs that had proved too restrictive to effectively house and service people with complex needs experiencing chronic homelessness.

• Home repair: The City of Detroit launched the 0% Interest Home Repair Loan Program in April 2015. The Program offers 10-year interest-free loans between $5,000 and $25,000 to help homeowners invest in the repair of their homes. The program is led by the City of Detroit, in partnership with LISC, Bank of America, and HUD.

• Preservation fund: The Washington Housing Initiative was launched by the JBG Smith Impact Fund (“Impact Pool”) and the Washington Housing Conservancy (WHC), in partnership with the Federal City Council to promote preservation of affordable workforce housing. The Initiative finances the acquisition and development of mixed-income multifamily properties, investing in projects with tax-exempt junior mortgages and mezzanine loans.

See Action 9: “Attract mission- motivated capital and corporate partners” for details on action that will be taken.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 31

Resource Analysis

As already discussed, Nashville faces significant housing affordability challenges, and there is no single resource to financially advance housing security. It is imperative that the public sector utilize its available resources strategically and efficiently, both because of the scale of the challenges and because of waning federal funding for housing programs. However, existing local public resources are not enough and must be leveraged with state, federal, private, and philanthropic funds.

In recent years, Metro has increased its investments in affordable housing. The Barnes Fund, established in 2013 as Nashville’s first housing trust fund, has awarded over $160 million to 40 nonprofit developers, resulting in the creation or preservation of over 6,000 affordable housing units. Initially funded at $2 million annually, the fund received an annual $30 million in the past three years bolstered by American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds. Metro, in fact, utilized more than half of its ARPA funds to address housing and homelessness, such as allocating $50 million in 2022 to OHS for homeless services, shelter operations, and eviction prevention, and deploying nearly $67 million in emergency rental and utility assistance between 2021 and 2023. With ARPA funds running out and future federal support uncertain, Metro must now focus on optimizing resources to expand housing choices and affordability for more residents. Metro must balance its housing needs in the same budget that supports essential government functions.

Programs funded by ARPA led to new programs and may offer insights for future approaches and continued support. The Low Barrier Housing Collective, for example, substantially expanded Nashville’s ability to serve the hardest-to-house populations, while offering an approach for engaging more landlords and property managers in the future. In addition, the Temporary Interim Housing program and Housing First Supportive Services programs expanded crucially needed services — discontinuation of which would come with significant human consequences. Nashville also successfully funded its first- ever limited equity cooperative housing development which will provide residents, who might otherwise be excluded from homeownership opportunities a chance to purchase a share in the development. This innovative model encourages more permanent affordability while allowing residents to build equity without requiring a large down payment or traditional home loan.

Metro-funded housing programs cover a broad range of housing activities (housing construction, housing rehabilitation, direct service to households, etc.). In some instances, Metro will have multiple programs with overlapping purposes; for new rental construction, for example, Metro has one program deploying federal funds (through MDHA using HOME funding) and one program deploying local funds (Metro Housing Division using Barnes funding), while both programs interface with THDA’s administration of federal LIHTC funds within Davidson County. In addition, MDHA has authority to grant a Payment-in-Lieu of Taxes (PILOT) to a LIHTC project.

While administering resources across multiple entities and programs is not necessarily problematic, fragmentation can foster inefficiencies, and it increases the importance of establishing effective systems, policies and practices for cultivating efficiency and alignment of strategic functions. Various actions within the UHS will help to create this coordination and alignment—primarily those nested under Strategy A, “Enhance and align Nashville’s housing ecosystem to comprehensively and collectively address Nashville’s housing needs,” and Strategy B, “Optimize and grow financial and resource support for affordable housing across public, private and philanthropic sectors.”

Metro also has opportunities to tap into new resources. Metro has historically left existing federal resources on the table and should explore new resources available at the federal and state levels, though availability of such resources will vary across administrations, such as Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding. Finally, while Nashville is a low-tax city with limited public support to increase its tax burden, Metro could strategically explore new, targeted local revenue sources for housing, such as user fees, and collaborate with partners to encourage state actors to more efficiently use federal resources. The 2021 Affordable Housing Task Force Report provided a menu of potential resources for affordable housing, but each of these potential sources requires State law action. Drawing from that report, Action 7 provides additional information on potential local and state funding sources that could be pursued, while Appendix G: “Affordable Housing Finance 101” provides a deeper analysis of revenue options elevated in the 2021 Affordable Housing Task Force Report.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 32 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Current Tools

Metro and MDHA use various tools to support affordable housing development and other housing needs for residents, including the Barnes Fund, gap financing programs, Payments in Lieu of Taxes (PILOTs), homeowner rehab programs, Property Tax Relief and Property Tax Freeze, services contracts with community-based organizations, etc. The Barnes Fund is largely funded from the Metro operating budget, while PILOT programs impact revenue collections to fund the operating budget. MDHA’s affordable housing finance, rehab, and voucher programs are solely dependent on federal appropriations. See Figure 17 for an overview of the tools that exist along Nashville’s housing continuum and Appendix E: “Program Inventory and Profiles” for profiles of all current programs.

Subsidy Tools

Income-restricted affordable housing is more expensive and difficult to construct than typical residential construction due to the complicated and necessary layering of subsidies to make these projects financially feasible. Because rents in these projects are restricted, affordable housing developments cannot support much, if any, debt. See Appendix F: “Affordable Housing Finance 101” for more information. Subsidy tools close the gap between what households can afford to pay and the substantial cost to develop and operate housing. Public subsidy is costly, but often necessary to make the development and preservation of homes affordable to households earning less than 80% of the AMI feasible. Subsidy also supports programs and services that support housing access and stability for residents, such as street outreach, rent assistance, and owner-occupied repair programs for homeowners. Without local public funding dedicated to households with the greatest needs (e.g. elderly persons, children), then it is impossible to avoid significant harm from housing insecurity and, in extreme cases, homelessness.

Metro has the ability to allocate resources from its operating budget, to issue bonds, as well as to use resources received through the federal government, such as entitlement funds.8 Metro (and partners such as MDHA) deploy public subsidy (including tax benefits, loans, grants and discounted land) directly to build homes or indirectly to reduce costs by building infrastructure for new homes. To address Nashville’s housing needs effectively, limited local public funding must target households that the market does not serve and development projects that leverage state, federal, philanthropic, and private capital to achieve the greatest impact.

Highly Utilized Resources

As shown in Figure 15, Nashville has built thousands of affordable rental homes in the past ten years. This surge in development was driven by a confluence of supportive conditions – low interest rates, winning a large share of the State’s 4% LIHTC allocation (which require utilization of private activity bonds issued by Health and Education Facilities Board (HEFB) and Industrial Development Board (IDB), strong funding through the State’s Community Investment Tax Credit (CITC) by local banks, influx of ARPA dollars, and expanded Barnes funding. In FY 2022, almost 1,400 affordable rental homes were funded for development or preservation with LIHTC, a federal tax credit awarded to development projects by states or their designee. Moreover, it is estimated that in FY 2022 over 3,100 homes were funded for new construction or preservation with LIHTC and local tools, including the Barnes Fund. Action 17. “Continue strong production of affordable housing using Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC)” is focused on sustaining and expanding the level of LIHTC equity being invested in building and preserving affordable rental homes in Nashville. The $193 million of LIHTC equity dwarfs the Barnes Fund and the Federal entitlement funding Metro receives to build affordable homes. While the possibility of corporate tax liability reduction advanced by a federal administration could negatively affect tax credit demand and subsequently pricing, this tool is by far the most important source of funding to create affordable rental homes in Nashville.

Moving forward, it will be important for the Nashville housing community to expand its utilization of available housing finance tools. Tennessee, like many states, has reached its volume cap for private activity bonds, which

8 There are limitations on Metro’s ability to allocate resources from its General Fund and issue bonds. For example, Metro generally cannot give taxpayer funds directly to private, for-profit entities. Additionally, Metro cannot issue bonds for the benefit of private entities without satisfying state Constitution’s requirement that three-fourth of voters approve in a referendum election. However, instrumentalities such as IDB and HEFB can issue revenue bonds for certain projects delineated under State law.)

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 33 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

effectively constrains the supply of 4% LIHTC. Options like 501(c)(3)bonds, the federal Section 108 program, and new federal funding sources could provide opportunities, but their availability remains uncertain. While these tools may be worth pursuing, it is unclear how accessible they will be in the future, making it essential to remain flexible in funding strategies. Action 7: “Explore new, dedicated local and state funding for affordable housing and homelessness services” and Action 9: “Attract mission-motivated capital and corporate partners” are focused on expanding the funding sources available to support the creation and preservation of affordable homes in Nashville.

Federal Entitlement Funds

Federal funds, including both entitlement funds and ARPA funds, support a significant share of programs and services available for homeowners, renters, and people experiencing homelessness. Sustaining the level of service of existing programs will be a challenge in some cases due to the upcoming expiration of federal funds made available following the pandemic (ARPA) and the potential of reduced or eliminated federal funding. Working together to ensure that budgets are aligning with key strategies, programs are delivering efficiently on intended outcomes, and that available federal resources, such as vouchers, are being fully and effectively utilized, will be key.

While federal funds are referred to as entitlements—because all local governments over a certain population are entitled to receive them—the funding levels have fluctuated over time. Over the past five years, funding has increased, but prior to that, it had been declining since the 1990s. Nashville should be prepared for significant reductions or the elimination of entitlement funding for affordable homes in the coming years. Further, ongoing continuing resolutions, instead of annual budget appropriations, create additional uncertainty and delays or gaps in programming.

Federal entitlement funds and competitive funding have long been the primary source for homelessness resources and programming in Nashville, making it critical to optimize existing resources and seek new funding opportunities should there be future funding cuts or delays. Strategy E: Create permanent housing options for persons experiencing or at-risk of homelessness includes key actions on how to support homelessness prevention efforts.

Figure 18: Davidson County FY 2023 Federal Entitlement Allocations

Federal Entitlements (FY23) $130,764,819 Section 8 HCV Section 8 Five Year Mainstream Vouchers Housing Assistance Payments Program Continuum of Care CDBG / Entitlement Grants HOME Investment Partnerships Program Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS Weatherization Assistance for Low-Income Persons Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation - Single Room Occupancy Family Self-Sufficiency Program Community-Based Crime Reduction Low Income Housing Assistance Program Emergency Shelter Grants Program Federal Communications Commission Programs Coronavirus State & Local Fiscal Recovery Program Americorps Program Community Health Worker Program Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program

$69,812,906 $2,223,956 $32,213,294 $2,317,539 $14,676,870 $3,237,491 $1,051,011 $368,327 $407,039 $341,818 $62,033 $117,277 $2,610,343 $369 $822,480 $1,495 $294,907 $205,664

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 34

Figure 19: Federal Entitlement Program for Housing and Community Development

Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)

CDBG is the largest and most flexible entitlement fund. It can be used for activities that provide decent housing and a suitable living environment or that expand economic opportunities. Nashville received $4.9 million in FY 2023, with MDHA administering these funds on behalf of Metro. These funds were split between economic development, infrastructure, public services, and administration. Approximately $2.3 million was deployed by MDHA for home repair programs to promote housing stability.

CDBG Disaster Recovery

Nashville-Davidson sometimes receives CDBG funding from to specifically address long-term recovery needs following a natural disaster. Currently, MDHA is administering a CDBG-DR grant in the amount of $5,151,000 to support recovery efforts resulting from flooding in 2021. The Metro Housing Division is awaiting final approval of its Action Plan to utilize $10,827,467 for recovery efforts resulting from the March 2020 tornadoes. These disaster funds pass from HUD through the State of Tennessee to Metro.

HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME)

The largest federal block grant exclusively to create affordable housing, HOME funds may be used to construct, acquire, or rehabilitate affordable homes or to provide housing assistance. Nashville received $2.3 million in FY 2024, deployed by MDHA through an RFP. A portion of these funds went towards gap financing for new affordable rental homes, while the remainder went towards financing new homes for affordable homeownership.

HOME ARP

HOME ARP is a one-time allocation of $9,298,780 of American Rescue Plan Act funds to assist “qualified population” - individuals and families experiencing or at-risk homelessness; fleeing or attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking or human trafficking; other populations where providing supportive services or assistance would prevent the family’s homelessness or would serve those with the greatest risk of housing instability; and veterans and families that include a veteran family members that meet one of the preceding the criteria. MDHA initially planned to direct most of the funding for the development of affordable rental housing but since has amended the plan to direct 85% of the allocation ($7,904,430) to supportive services. Funds must be expended by September 30, 2030.

Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG)

The ESG Program helps those who have experienced homelessness or other housing crises regain permanent housing. Nashville received $453K in FY 2023, administered by MDHA. ESG funds supported homelessness street outreach, shelter operating support, and financial support to persons experiencing homelessness.

Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA)

HOPWA is the only Federal program dedicated to the housing needs of people living with HIV/AIDS. Nashville received $2.4 million in FY 2023. The funds are administered by MDHA; HOPWA funds supported short-term rentals for persons with HIV/AIDs as well as support services through a network of organizations throughout the Nashville region.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 35

Figure 20: Tools to Support Affordability, Access, and Stability Along Nashville’s Housing Continuum

Tools Along Nashville’s Housing Continuum

Barnes Fund Rental & Homeownership

Community Income Distribution Extremely Low Income

Very Low Income Low Income Moderate Income Middle Income High Income Unhoused

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60%70%80% 90%100%110%120% 130%140%150%160% 170%180%190%200%

Middle Density by Right

Transit Oriented Development Zoning and Approval Processes

Deed Restrictions/Stipulations on Metro-Supported Housing

Voluntary Incentive for Attainable Housing

Metro-Owned Land Disposition

Affordable Housing Gap Financing

Low Barrier Housing Collective

Project-Based Vouchers

MDHA Cayce Transformation

Low Income Housing Tax Credit

LIHTC PILOT

Investment Tax Credit

HOME/Community Development Block Grant

Connecting Housing to Infrastructure Program

Mixed-Income PILOT

Catalyst FundLow-Income Home Energy Assistance Program/Water Payment Assistance

Eviction Right to Counsel

System/Resource Navigation

HOME ARP Supportive Services

Homelessness Street Outreach

Homelessness Placement Services

Housing Choice Vouchers

Emergency Rental Assistance

Property Tax Relief

Weather Assistance Program

Barnes Rehab

CDBG

TVA Home Uplift

Certified HUD Housing Counceling (THDA and Nonprofit Partners)

Property Tax Freeze

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 36

Program Utilization

According to analysis conducted by HR&A, in recent years, among homeowners, energy efficiency upgrades were the most commonly used program, followed by down payment assistance and property tax relief. Renters most frequently used utility and emergency rental assistance programs. However, more than half of the survey respondents facing housing instability reported not using any housing support programs, with voucher assistance and case management being the most frequently used among those who did.

As Metro considers how to most effectively utilize its existing tools and limited resources, neighborhood categorizations provided by the Market Value Analysis can provide helpful guidance on where to prioritize or target funding. As shown in the figures below, the MVA used Davidson County Census block groups to identify markets with similar characteristics. The underlying characteristics analyzed are shown in Figure 22. The MVA identified eight distinct housing markets, which were labeled with letters “A” through “H”. Although each market type has unique characteristics, they fall into four pairings (categorized as Regional, Strong, Developing, and Vulnerable) that each share similar opportunities and needs. Figure 21 provides a map which indicates where each market type is located across the county. The MVA has been used in cities across the country to help inform what strategic interventions are appropriate based on the underlying market conditions. Figure 23 describes how federal and local housing tools could be prioritized in geographies based on the MVA categories.

Regulatory Analysis

Policies and regulations are an important component of Metro’s housing toolkit, and they can also function as consequential barriers to addressing housing goals. Three primary categories of policy/regulatory tools include land use, resident protections, and subsidy.

Land Use

Land use regulations shape where homes can be located, what types of homes can be built, and how many homes are built. Land use tools, and more broadly building codes and the development approval process, are the most powerful lever available to local governments to shape their housing market. When deployed effectively, these tools can reduce displacement, increase housing supply, stabilize rents and sale prices, and address racial segregation. However, land use tools alone cannot meet the needs of Nashville’s extremely low-income households (i.e. those earning below approximately $30,000 annually). Those are the lowest-income households whose incomes are not enough to cover the cost to build and maintain a home and require public subsidy.

To address Nashville’s housing challenges, land use and development approval processes must allow for enough homes to be built to accommodate job and population growth in a diversity of types--townhomes, accessory dwelling units, duplexes, triplexes, etc.–to reflect the range of households that make up Nashville.

Metro determines the land use, building codes and development approval processes in which developers make investment decisions (e.g. zoning and development review, information dissemination) within the constraints of state law, which imposes some significant limits. For example, Tennessee municipalities are prohibited from instituting affordability requirements or impact fees as preconditions for rental housing development. Affordability requirements, like those traditionally known as “inclusionary zoning,” mandate that a certain percentage of newly built apartments be restricted to occupants making below a set income, ensuring that lower-income residents have access to new housing stock. While Tennessee law does not allow for an affordability requirement, the legislature did approve a 2024 bill that allows municipalities to create voluntary programs. Impact fees, meanwhile, are used in many places to fund infrastructure improvements necessitated by new developments. The inability to charge these fees or set affordability requirements, however, means Nashville must largely rely on subsidy, land use incentives, and voluntary programs to encourage the development of affordable housing.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 37 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Market Value Analysis Categories

• Regional Markets

◊ “A” markets represent the most expensive neighborhoods in the county. They are

predominantly owner occupied (80% own their homes). These markets have some of the highest rates of housing investment, measured by permits for renovation and new construction, in the county.

◊ “B” markets also have sale prices well above the county median but contain a mix of

homeowners and renters. On average, only 50% of households in “B” markets own their homes.

• Strong Markets

◊ “C” markets have housing values close to the regional average. Most households own their

homes and signs of vacancy, financial stress, or maintenance issues are rare.

◊ “D” markets contain homes priced just above the regional average and are among the most

demographically diverse in Davidson County. Many households rent with just one-quarter (24%) of households owning their homes. These markets contain a meaningful amount of the county’s subsidized housing units, with 11% of renters living in a publicly subsidized development or using a housing choice voucher.

• Developing Markets

◊ “E” markets contain a mix of owner and renter occupied households and the highest

concentration of subsidized affordable housing in the county. Eighty-one percent of renters in “E” markets live in subsidized developments (including LIHTC-financed buildings) or are using a housing choice voucher.

◊ “F” markets are predominantly home to owners. These communities contain a mix of owner homes and older housing stock and are less uniformly residential that other communities in Davidson County.

• Vulnerable Markets

◊ “G” markets contain a stock of older, moderately priced, owner-occupied homes with visible

deferred maintenance and higher rates of housing vacancy than other areas of the county. The rate of housing investment, measured by permitting for renovation or new construction, is low compared to other markets.

◊ “H” markets contain moderately priced renter-occupied homes. Like “G” markets, deferred

maintenance is more common. These markets also contain a sizeable share of subsidized housing units, with nearly one in ten renters living in a subsidized development or using a housing choice voucher.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 38

Figure 21: Davidson County Market Types The Market Value Analysis classified Census block groups by market strength based on administrative data, such as property sales, building permits, code violations, and affordable housing locations.

Figure 22: Davidson County Markets with Underlying Characteristics (2028-2022)

Source: Reinvestment Fund. Note: Results exclude 12 block groups that were unclassified due to insufficient sales data.

Res. Land Uses

A 34 $1,287,588 0.69 90% 1% 1% 1% 17% 0% 81%

B 46 $779,871 0.62 50% 1% 3% 2% 13% 2% 63%

C 78 $460,159 0.45 78% 1% 4% 1% 13% 2% 77%

D 38 $483,255 0.64 24% 1% 3% 3% 10% 11% 27%

E 45 $387,847 0.67 40% 2% 8% 2% 14% 81% 59%

F 72 $329,289 0.45 69% 2% 5% 2% 11% 6% 49%

G 80 $286,421 0.37 73% 3% 10% 1% 6% 8% 82%

H 88 $297,765 0.49 26% 2% 10% 2% 9% 10% 66%

Total 493 $468,520 0.51 54% 1% 6% 2% 12% 19% 58%

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 39

n= Media Sales

Price (Adj)

Coeff. Var. Sales

Home- owners

Financial Distress

Code Violations

USPS Vacancy

Housing Permits

Subsidized Units

Figure 23: Tools to Utilize Based on Market Value Assessment Category

Program Name Recommended Geographic Targets

Affordable Housing Gap Financing

The geography of units produced by this program will be primarily driven by the location of LIHTC awards, a process governed independently by the State QAP and developer decisions. However, it may be possible to prioritize projects seeking 4% LIHTC through the tax-exemp bond application process managed by HEFB. Projects that are located in neighborhoods categorized A-D should be a higher priority for funding.

Temporary Interim Housing

OHS and Metro should seek to limit the concentration of facilities in neighborhoods categorized as E-H in the MVA.

Low Barrier Housing Collective

As the program evolves, OHS has an opportunity to reach into all of Nashville’s communities. Expanding into neighborhoods with fewer rental units will be proportionally more difficult and will also face barriers in neighborhoods where market rate rents are highest. A priority should be placed on expanding the number of lower barrier homes in neighborhoods categorized A-D. This may require expanding or adjusting the incentives offered to offset the higher rents in these areas. Consideration should also be given to avoid concentrating the number of participating rental homes in a given building. Excessive clusters can undermine the benefits of locating in neighborhoods that offer greater opportunity

Low Barrier Housing Competitive Grants

Given the range of factors OHS is likely to evaluate for competitive grants proposals, and given that only a handful of organizations are likely to be awarded in each funding round, geographic dispersal of awards should not be the top priority. Where there is an opportunity to secure homes in neighborhoods labeled A-D in the MVA, that should be a priority, and concentrating low barrier rental homes in any building should be avoided, particularly neighborhoods E-H on the MVA.

Eviction Right to Counsel

Eviction right to counsel should be a countywide service, and a focus should be on neighborhoods that have seen a shift in the MVA from E-H to A-D, and neighborhoods with higher displacement ratios.

Rental Rehab (MDHA)

Given that only a handful of households are likely to be awarded each year, geographic dispersal of awards should not be considered a top priority. Where rehabilitation occurs in stronger markets (A-D on the MVA), additional consideration should be given to the commitment of the property owner to maintaining affordability beyond what is required by the funding.

Homeowner Rehab (MDHA)

Homeownership rehabilitation should be provided countywide. Given the long backlog of households, the primary driver of prioritization should be the circumstances of individual households e.g. health and safety concerns, etc. When location is considered, deployment should focus on areas with high displacement scores in the MVA.

MDHA HOME Rental Program

The geography of units produced by this program will be dictated by the location of LIHTC properties and existing subsidized housing, a process governed independently by the State QAP and developer decisions. Consideration should also be given to whether the project already has federal requirements imposed upon it. Those projects that already have federal requirements should be a priority because HOME funding will not create additional costs and will be more efficient to invest. After these considerations, projects that are located in neighborhoods categorized A-D should be a higher priority for funding.

MDHA HOME Homeownership

Homeownership should be supported countywide. In neighborhoods categorized as A-D in the MVA, homeownership should be supported that expands opportunity for first generation homeowners. In neighborhoods E-H, homeownership should be supported for households earning up to 100% AMI.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 40

Program Name Recommended Geographic Targets

Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) Renters & Homeowners

A concentration of LIHEAP assistance to households in low-income neighborhoods does not pose equity concerns in the same way that concentration of subsidized housing might. This program should have a household needs-based focus as opposed to geographic focus. Neighborhoods categorized with a high displacement coefficient in the MVA could be targeted for outreach.

Barnes Fund Homeownership Rehab

Homeownership rehabilitation should be provided countywide. Given the long backlog of households, the primary driver of prioritization should be around the circumstances of individual households e.g., health and safety concerns. When location is considered, the focus should be on areas with high displacement scores in the MVA.

Barnes Fund Rental

The geography of units produced by this program may be partially driven by the location of LIHTC awards, a process governed independently by the State QAP and developer decisions. Projects that are located in neighborhoods categorized A-D should be a higher priority for funding.

Barnes Fund Homeownership Creation

Homeownership should be supported countywide. In neighborhoods categorized as A-D by the MVA, homeownership should be supported that expands opportunity for first generation homeowners. In neighborhoods E-H, homeownership should be supported for households earning up to 100% AMI.

Mixed-Income PILOT

By the nature of market-rate development, the mixed-income PILOT will favor neighborhoods with stronger market conditions because those are the areas that will attract market-rate development. Metro should not place additional geographic restrictions.

LIHTC PILOT

The geography of units produced by this program will be driven by the location of LIHTC awards, a process governed independently by the State QAP and developer decisions. Metro should not impose additional restrictions on location.

Connecting Housing to Infrastructure Program (CHIP)

CHIP should prioritize neighborhoods that have higher rates of traffic-related fatalities and/or lower levels of infrastructure and amenities. The MVA does not provide an effective measurement of this need. It will need to be assessed on a project-by-project basis or through a countywide inventory of infrastructure and amenities. The current countywide lens is Vision Zero.

Property Tax Freeze Program: Seniors

Property tax freeze should be a countywide offering, but outreach could focus on neighborhoods that have seen the greatest property value increases and neighborhoods with higher displacement ratios in the MVA.

Property Tax Relief Program: Seniors, Disabled, Veterans

Property tax freeze should be a countywide offering, but outreach could focus on neighborhoods that have seen the greatest property value increases and neighborhoods with higher displacement ratios in the MVA.

Property Tax Deferral Program: Seniors, Disabled

Property tax deferral should continue to be a countywide offering, but outreach could focus on neighborhoods that have seen the greatest property value increases and neighborhoods with higher displacement ratios in the MVA.

Section 8 Vouchers Administered by MDHA

Increasing the number of vouchers in neighborhoods categorized as A-D by the MVA should be a priority.

Weatherization Assistance Program (Renters & Homeowners)

A concentration of weatherization assistance to households in low-income neighborhoods does not pose equity concerns in the same way that concentration of subsidized housing might. This program should have a household needs-based focused as opposed to geographic focus. Neighborhoods categorized as E-H could be targeted for outreach.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 41

Program Name Recommended Geographic Targets

Catalyst Fund The Catalyst Fund should target properties in neighborhoods categorized as A-H by the

MVA and those with a high displacement coefficient.

Emergency Rental Assistance

A concentration of Emergency Rental Assistance to households in low-income neighborhoods does not pose equity concerns in the same way that concentration of subsidized housing might. This program should be based on household needs as opposed to a geographic focus. Neighborhoods categorized with a high displacement coefficient in the MVA could be targeted for outreach and education.

Disaster Recovery Grants

Disaster recovery grants should focus on areas impacted by natural disasters, especially areas at risk of housing loss if homeowners are not able to make repairs to their homes.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 42

Building Code

Building codes significantly shape the number of homes built and the cost to build those homes by dictating the material and labor costs of construction, which places limitations on design and approval processes. These requirements are put in place to protect health and safety, and while aesthetics are not their focus, they can impact the look and feel of a building. Metro must adhere to the minimum standard established by the State, but Metro has the ability to adopt more prescriptive standards.

Increasingly sustainability and resilience considerations are driving refinements to building codes. In June 2024, the Housing Division partnered with the Urban Land Institute’s (ULI) Terwilliger Center for Housing and ULI Nashville to host a Technical Assistance Panel (TAP) that investigated ways the Housing Division could promote sustainable and resilient housing. The panel’s final report Sustaining Nashville: Building Sustainability and Resilience into Affordable Housing provided recommendations related to building standards and performance. Notably, the panel recommended updating building codes to meet Phius Passive House standards or the 2021 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) for new construction and performing a comprehensive building performance assessment for building retrofits to enhance building energy performance. More information on the TAP and the full report can be found on ULI Nashville’s web page.

In 2024, the Tennessee General Assembly took action allowing municipalities new flexibility in building code requirements including the option to allow taller single-stair residential buildings and eliminating sprinkler requirements for three- and four-family residential buildings, which can make small-scale multi-family buildings more affordable while keeping them safe. The Tennessee General Assembly amended Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 68-102-101, to allow six-story single egress stair residential buildings, with a maximum of four units per story, provided they meet specific safety requirements. Previously single egress stair buildings were limited to three stories. In an effort to reduce construction costs for three-family and four-family dwellings, the State also amended the Tennessee Code Annotated to prohibit the State Fire Marshal from requiring automatic fire sprinkler systems in buildings under 5,000 square feet and fewer than three stories, as long as the structure meets a two- hour fire-resistance rating for wall, floor, and ceiling separation assemblies. It grants local governments the ability to still adopt mandatory sprinkler requirements by local ordinance. Metro Planning’s Housing and Infrastructure Study provides an in-depth assessment of these opportunities and recommendations.

Short-Term Rentals

Short-term rentals have a significant impact on Nashville’s housing market. There are over 7,500 active short-term rentals registered with Metro. Approximately 2,285 of the 7,535 registered short-term rentals are owner-occupied. These are furnished properties in which the owner rents their home or part of their home when they are away or while they live there. Of the active short-term rental permits in Nashville, nearly 70 percent are not for owner- occupants. These properties have a direct impact on the availability of homes in Nashville and as a result, the cost of housing, displacement pressure, access to homeownership, and the availability of homes overall.9 There is limited impact on the availability of homes in Nashville as a result of owner-occupied short-term rentals.

Metro has a limited ability to regulate short-term rentals under Tennessee State law. As Metro updates its land use and development approval requirements, it must consider what limitations are appropriate and allowed under State law. See Action 13: “Evaluate and adjust zoning and land use policies to unlock development opportunities, expand housing types, and increase annual housing production.”

Short-term rental properties are also a source of funding for the creation and preservation of affordable homes. A portion of the local occupancy tax proceeds for short-term rentals provide funding to the Barnes Fund. This source added approximately $4 million to the Barnes Fund in the 2023 fiscal year.10

9 Nashville Open data portal 10 Fiscal Year 2023 Short Term Rental Property Report includes Barnes Fund - https://www.nashville.gov/departments/finance/reports/short-term-rental-property- tax-reports

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 43 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Resident Protections

Resident protections tools include laws and policies that set guardrails on how renters and homeowners are treated by property owners and mortgage holders. These protections are critical to mitigating displacement and creating balance between the interests of residents and owners and investors. These protections do not create new homes, but they can soften market pressure that can lead to displacement.

Tennessee state law limits local policies to protect tenants’ rights, leaving Nashville with fewer legal protections compared to other cities and states. Some tenant protections have even been reduced in recent years, such as the 2024 legislation cutting the time tenants can request an eviction delay from 15 days to just seven. This shortened timeline limits tenants’ ability to address issues and avoid the eviction proceeding. Since Nashville cannot override state laws, its ability to advance countywide tenant protections is constrained, but coordination with private sector partners and other Tennessee cities could help advocate for changes in state policy.

Though limited in its ability to pursue countywide protections, Metro has greater flexibility in instituting protections and requirements in properties that are recipients of public funds. These requirements which are discussed further in Action 35: “Incorporate stronger tenant protections in publicly subsidized income-restricted affordable housing” can include just-cause eviction requirements, source of income protections, and other requirements. Such protections can be complemented by expansion of services like counsel for those facing eviction. Currently, the Eviction Right to Counsel programs have supported the expansion of legal assistance to tenants facing eviction but the program funding is set to expire, and additional resources and capacity are needed to support more tenants.

Similarly, protections for homeowners can include policies that prevent harassment or pressured sales tactics, along with property tax relief programs for longtime homeowners, such as Nashville’s Property Tax Freeze and Property Tax Relief programs. These protections and programs could be complemented by subsidized programs like pro bono legal assistance for estate planning and foreclosure prevention.11 Similar to tenant protections, the state holds authority over property rights and controls any expansion or adjustments to property tax freeze and relief programs. Although state legislative efforts to curb predatory practices against vulnerable homeowner have not been successful, one example is Sen. Charlane Oliver’s bill, SB234, which aimed to limit the number of times an investor and their employees were permitted to contact a property owner with an unsolicited offer to buy the property owner’s home or land. To date, there has been minimal progress in advancing such state protections or expanding property tax freeze and relief programs.

In 2022, leaders from multiple Metro departments, including the Codes Department, discussed ways to mitigate inequitable impacts in code enforcement following reports of lower-income residents being subjected to fines as a result of reports filed by neighbors. Action 43: “Leverage the Codes Department to support vulnerable homeowners and tenants and inform program outreach” discusses further ways in which code enforcement can be positioned to better serve vulnerable residents and avoid enabling predatory behavior targeted at lower-income residents who may face difficulties coming into code compliance.

11 Property tax relief can take various forms. Caps on property taxes would require State action to amend the Tennessee Constitution. Property tax caps can have implications for a government’s credit rating if ratings agencies believe the cap could appreciably affect Metro’s ability to generate revenue necessary to make bonds payments.

Type of Displacement Forced Displacement - Circumstances in which a move is spurred by a physical or legal force that requires a household to vacate its current home/location.

Pressured - Circumstances in which a household or organization leaves their home/ location because remaining is untenable.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 44

Subsidy

As discussed previously, land use tools are unable to fully meet the affordability needs of lower-income Nashvillians. Factors such as land costs, material costs, and labor costs all influence the pricing of housing. Unfortunately, the cost to produce housing has become increasingly expensive making it less financially feasible to develop properties that are affordable to households earning 60% of the AMI or below. Subsidy programs, as outlined in the “Resource Analysis” section, are crucial in bridging the affordability gap in housing development and operations. These public tools, including tax benefits, loans, grants, rental assistance, and discounted land, make it financially feasible to create and maintain affordable housing for lower-income households. Without subsidies, the rising costs of land, materials, and labor make it increasingly difficult to develop homes that are affordable to households earning 60% of the area median income (AMI) or below.

These subsidies primarily benefit vulnerable populations, such as low-income families, older adults, and individuals facing homelessness, who are often unable to access stable housing through the private market. By providing financial support, these programs ensure that households facing economic hardship can secure stable and affordable housing options, improving their overall quality of life.

To be effective, however, subsidy programs require sustained and increased funding at all levels of government. A reduction in funding at any level puts added pressure on others, making it harder to meet housing demands. Maximizing the impact of subsidy tools means optimizing available resources, ensuring responsible investment, and maintaining public trust through transparent performance metrics. These measures are essential to delivering meaningful results and ensuring that subsidies reach the households with the greatest needs.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 45 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Land Use

• What It Is: Planning processes, land use, building regulations, development approval processes, and infrastructure investments (e.g., zoning, development review, and information dissemination) that govern where and what types of homes can be built. These tools are guided by Nashville’s General Plan, NashvilleNext, department master plans, and the zoning and building code.

• How it Advances Housing Security: Shapes the housing market by determining where housing can be located, the types of homes built, and the overall supply of housing. It aims to reduce displacement, reduce the cost of new housing, increase housing supply, stabilize rents, and address racial segregation. Existing infrastructure, combined with new investments from the public and private sector, also shape housing security by limiting or providing access to daily needs like groceries, childcare, or park space, through a mobility network that can be more or less safe for different modes of travel.

• Who it helps: New, unsubsidized housing development primarily serves middle- to high-income households. New market-rate development also provides indirect benefits for lower-income households by increasing housing diversity and availability, putting less pressure on moderately-priced housing. However, it cannot fully address the needs of most households earning below $60,000 annually without additional public subsidies. Improved land use processes also benefit the needs of lower-income households by expanding what land is available for new income-restricted housing.

Resident Protections

• What It Is: Laws, policies, and interventions that protect renters and homeowners from unfair treatment by property owners or mortgage holders, including eviction protections, and to prevent harassment or pressured sales.

• How It Advances Housing Security: Mitigates displacement and creates a balance between residents, owners, and investors, ensuring that vulnerable populations are protected from market pressures and discriminatory practices.

• Who It Helps: Renters and homeowners, particularly those at risk of eviction, displacement, discrimination, or exploitation. Targeted protections can help prevent homelessness, stabilize tenants in their homes, and support longtime homeowners facing tax burdens or the threat of foreclosure. Education and outreach can empower residents on their Fair Housing rights and elevate responsibilities of the housing industry.

Subsidy

• What It Is: Public subsidy tools - such as tax benefits, loans, grants, rental assistance, and discounted land - used to close the affordability gap in housing development and operations, help increase housing security, and support access to affordable housing options

• How It Advances Housing Security: Makes housing development and preservation affordable to lower-income households, supporting programs that aid housing access, stability, and affordability (e.g., rental assistance, street outreach, homeowner repair programs).

• Who It Helps: Primarily serves low-income households, including older adults, children, and those facing homelessness. It ensures that households with the greatest need have access to stable and affordable housing options, especially when the private market cannot meet those needs.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 46 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

How Nashville Can Advance Housing Security

The people of Nashville need housing security now more than ever. We want to strive to create a Nashville where every resident has access to a safe, quality home where they can flourish. To maximize our impact and deliver on our vision of housing security for all, Nashville must have a clear plan that is suited to the needs of our community and evolves with a changing housing market.

The following strategies and actions will guide Metro Nashville’s Housing Division, other Metro agencies addressing housing and homelessness, and private partners for the next ten years. While Metro will lead the charge, the successful implementation of this strategy is not solely within Metro government’s resource capacity. Advancing these strategies requires the collective efforts of both public and private stakeholders, with crucial support from state and federal governments. Metro Nashville recognizes that, without the sustained financial resources and policy support from these higher levels of government, achieving comprehensive housing security for all Nashvillians will not be possible. With that said, the Unified Housing Strategy is intended to foster needed collaboration and provide a shared plan that empowers philanthropists, developers, government partners, and advocates, to work together towards our shared vision of housing security.

Each of the strategies and related actions presented below, while ambitious, reflects what must be accomplished to collectively meet Nashville’s housing security needs. Each strategy includes multiple action steps, an implementation plan outlining the resources and capacities required from the public and private sectors, and performance metrics to track progress.

Finally, as a call to action, each person reading the Unified Housing Strategy can play and needs to play a role, either as an individual or through a business or organization, in meeting the housing needs of our neighbors. These are Nashville’s collective strategies and actions, and it will take all of us to achieve the vision that all Nashvillians have housing security.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 47 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

STRATEGY A: ALIGN THE HOUSING ECOSYSTEM

Enhance and align Nashville’s housing ecosystem to comprehensively and collectively address Nashville’s housing needs

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 48 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 48

What is the focus of this strategy?

This strategy focuses on creating a high-functioning ecosystem needed to more effectively address our housing needs outlined in the “Key Findings” and “Ecosystem Analysis” sections. Strategy A includes actions to establish clear lines of authority and alignment between key stakeholders, build out important capacities across the Mayor’s Office and Housing Division, and strengthen collaboration with private sector partners, such as developers, service providers, funders, and advocates.

Why is this strategy important?

Following the recommendation of the Affordable Housing Task Force, Metro Nashville created the Housing Division in January 2022, the city’s first office dedicated to addressing Nashville’s housing needs and long- standing inequities. While the Task Force’s recommendation to establish a place within Metro to manage and champion housing efforts has been carried out, there is still room to improve coordination of housing efforts across Metro government and beyond. Metro’s housing ecosystem consists of multiple partners, including Metro departments, MDHA, developers, philanthropic organizations, corporations, lenders, and more. Addressing our housing needs and carrying out the actions laid out in the UHS require the support of all these entities. Therefore, Nashville’s housing ecosystem must be aligned with the UHS priorities; have champions from the public, private, and philanthropic sectors; and be effectively organized to ensure programs and resources are best serving Nashvillians.

This strategy ensures that Nashville’s housing ecosystem is equipped to respond to challenges, drive innovation, and support sustainable growth. With this coordinated approach, Nashville can move closer to making housing security a reality for all residents.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 49 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Who will this strategy serve?

Though this strategy is focused on strengthening the capacities and organization of the housing partners, it ultimately seeks to better serve all those who wish to call Nashville home.

How will we measure our progress?

The optimal outcome of the remaining strategies in the UHS cannot be achieved without a high-functioning ecosystem.

What will it take to achieve?

Staff Time,

Underwriting

Advisory/

Technology,

Funding

Data Executive Capacity or

Capacity

Contractual

Marketing, or

or Financing

Leadership Expertise

Services or

Digital Tools Technical Assistance

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions Nashville Nashville Unified Unified Housing Housing Strategy Strategy | | 50 50

Strategy A Actions

Action 1: Create an executive-level role in the Mayor’s office to oversee and advance policies and solutions to address Nashville’s housing needs

As described in the ecosystem analysis, many actors, both public and private sector, have roles to play in addressing housing supply objectives and housing service delivery. These actors are not limited to entities that have “housing” in their title—for example, Metro Social Services, Courts, Industrial Development Board (IDB), Health and Educational Facilities Board (HEFB), Codes, Department of Transportation, and others lead functions or administer resources that touch housing, even if that is not their primary focus.

To better align housing ecosystem actors, efforts, and resources, the Mayor should establish an executive-level position within the Mayor’s Office to coordinate across departments and entities to deliver on housing priorities. This individual would be charged with coordinating relevant local public agencies, boards, and commissions with housing functions and overseeing policy, programs, strategy, and budget requests for the respective entities under the Executive.

This role is important both because of the interconnectedness of housing, social services, and development efforts—including economic development and transit-oriented development—and the significant leadership needed to achieve progress on goals such as permanent supportive housing or the development of new financing tools. This role would be well positioned to provide that leadership. This position could take several forms including the creation of a new Chief Policy Officer or other executive. Regardless of the title, this role must facilitate collaboration around strategy, policies, programs, and public-private partnerships that can advance development and housing goals and provide oversight to relevant Metro entities. This executive would report to the Mayor but would work closely with Metro’s Chief Operating Officer, who oversees operational and administrative matters, and Metro’s Chief Development Officer, who will be closest to many opportunities involving Metro assets..

Action 1a: Create an interdepartmental leadership group to coordinate housing funding and services and execute MOUs with key public partners to formalize responsibilities and reporting requirements

While the Mayor and his team regularly meet with leaders of Metro departments and offices, as well as MDHA, on housing and homelessness issues, one of the primary functions of the executive-level role would be executing memoranda of understanding among key partners, including the Housing Division, OHS, MDHA, and other local public entities with a housing role, such as the IDB and HEFB. The MOU(s) would outline roles, responsibilities, priorities, and data coordination and reporting for the coming year as related to the implementation of the UHS. The purpose of the MOU is not punitive but rather to establish clarity on each entity’s strategic focus and internal capacity while also coordinating delivery to meet the needs outlined in the UHS.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 51 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

While each local public entity may have its own strategic plan and/or plans required by specific funding sources, the UHS should be the guiding document for identifying local housing priorities, setting strategic direction to meet those goals, establishing performance metrics, and prioritizing resources and policies related to the utilization of Metro resources and assets. The executive-level role is crucial to affecting this coordination, but Metro must designate a lead for undertaking strategic updates to the UHS and tracking and reporting implementation progress. This role should fall to the Housing Division.

It is common in other jurisdictions to convene key leadership monthly or quarterly to discuss ongoing initiatives, review high-level progress towards goals and housing pipelines, and plan for upcoming actions. Metro Nashville’s Housing Division as the lead agency should organize these convenings with relevant agencies, including but not limited to OHS, MDHA, MSS, and MAC. As the lead agency, the Housing Division should also be responsible for and accountable to the UHS and for maintaining focus on the agreed upon strategic priorities.

Further, the Housing Division should work closely with MDHA on the development of the Five-Year Consolidated Plan and annual updates, which guides the utilization of federal entitlement funds for housing and community development. To access these federal entitlement funds, every jurisdiction must submit a five-year plan to the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) that lays out goals for the deployment of the funds. These goals are based on an analysis of local housing and homelessness needs. Therefore, it is important for the UHS and the Consolidated Plan to align.

Historically, MDHA has been responsible for the development of the Consolidated Plan, administering its related programs, and producing the annual performance report on behalf of Metro Government. MDHA is an effective administrator with strong experience in the monitoring and compliance required for federal funds. However, for the Housing Division to effectively align key actors around the same housing goals, it should do its part too: The Housing Division should play a key role in the development of the 5-year plan alongside MDHA rather than serve as a stakeholder or provide comments on drafts, as well as assist MDHA in publicizing public meetings related to the Consolidated Plan, annual updates, and annual report. Given its experience, MDHA should continue to lead the drafting process and consultation and community engagement efforts, but the Housing Division, as Metro’s representative, should approve drafts before released to the public. This is a common responsibility of housing departments in other jurisdictions.

In addition to the consolidated plan, the Housing Division should have this same approval role before annual action plans and the consolidated annual performance and evaluation report (CAPER) are released for public comment. Because the Consolidated Plan, annual updates, and the CAPER must be submitted by deadlines set by HUD, the Housing Division must ensure availability and capacity to support MDHA in meeting these deadlines.

Action 1b: Ensure operating and capital spending plan appropriations related to housing and homelessness further the strategies and actions of the UHS and support strong housing and service delivery

Each year, Metro undertakes a budget development process that allocates resources from its General Fund across all agencies and establishes a Capital Spending Plan. It should be noted that housing programs, particularly the Barnes Fund, and homeless services are funded from the General Fund, while CSP funds can only be used for public works projects and capital expenses. With the adoption of clear goals in the UHS, agencies involved in addressing housing needs must align their budget requests with UHS strategies and actions. These requests must not only support progress toward housing goals but also quantify the anticipated impact of proposed investments.

This process extends beyond agencies explicitly focused on housing. All agencies that influence housing outcomes—such as Codes, which can promote housing stability through timely inspections— should be expected

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 52 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

to identify and justify their contributions. Metro’s broader budgeting framework should integrate this approach, including the use of the equity tool to prioritize investments that address systemic disparities. Additionally, the Office of the Chief Operating Officer (COO) should work with relevant agencies to embed housing objectives into agency performance plans, which guide and assess agency performance throughout the fiscal year.

In addition to requiring agencies to align budget requests with UHS goals, Metro must prepare operating and capital budgets that reflect the scale of Nashville’s housing needs while balancing other critical Metro needs. Using the UHS as a guide, Metro should prepare Annual Funding and Policy Priorities to address housing needs and advance UHS goals in each fiscal year.

To this end, Metro Finance will need to evaluate annually whether there is capacity to fund programs at these levels, while the Mayor’s Office—working with Finance, the Law Department, and Council—should assess the feasibility of pursuing new revenue-generating opportunities, as described in Action 7: “Explore new dedicated local and state funding sources for affordable housing and homelessness services” to provide more stability and continuity.

By aligning resources with the goals of the UHS, Metro can ensure a comprehensive, cross-agency commitment to addressing housing and homelessness. This coordinated approach strengthens service delivery, supports long- term housing stability, and fosters innovative solutions to meet the evolving needs of Nashvillians.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 53 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Action 2: Increase capacity and expertise of Metro agencies, either internally or through external partners

In addition to strong leadership and coordination, the housing ecosystems of peer jurisdictions have a consistent set of capacities that allow actors to effectively deploy resources, track progress and impact, and manage specialized programs responsive to specific housing needs. In Nashville, limited underwriting, asset management, and compliance monitoring capacity constrains the ability of key agencies to deploy resources efficiently while data collection efforts are largely siloed within individual agencies. Finally, Nashville has specific housing needs including expanded homeownership support, PSH creation, and preservation of existing deed restricted properties. These focus areas require specific expertise and attention.

To manage the execution of larger and more sophisticated housing programs, ensure the efficacy of public funds, and to cover the full range of housing issues Nashville faces, Metro, particularly the Housing Division and OHS, needs to expand its capacity and deepen its expertise. This can be achieved through training and technical assistance for existing staff, revising position descriptions to reflect priority areas of responsibility, recruiting and hiring additional staff, procuring external expertise through contracts with specialized consultants or firms, and/or partnering with other housing ecosystem partners who currently manage a similar function and display expertise. The best approach will likely include a combination of the above.

There are at least three factors to be considered when weighing whether to train existing staff, hire new staff, or hire contractors to expand Metro’s expertise and functions. These factors are cost, volume of demand for the functions, and relative value added by each alternative. In most markets, finding qualified staff is a challenge, and it can be costly. Salaries for staff vary considerably from local government to local government and by level of experience. Alternatives to hiring new staff include training existing staff or hiring external contractors to perform certain functions, the costs of which also will vary depending on the particular need. The relative costs of each of these three options (paying for new salaries, paying for training for existing staff, or hiring contractors) need to be considered when deciding which is best to enhance Metro’s operations.

In addition to cost, the volume of demand is a significant factor in determining the best avenue for adding capacity. Some capacities will not be needed on a full-time, year-round basis. This is related to the relative value added in training or adding staff compared to partnering or contracting. For capacities that require a high level of expertise and are not needed full time, contracting with external partners can deliver a higher value to the ecosystem.

Areas of capacity and expertise to grow including the following:

1. Underwriting capacity: In order to effectively utilize the resources for affordable housing available through Metro (including funding, land, and other incentives) as well as tap resources currently being left on the table, it is critical that Metro have professional underwriting capacity at its disposal. The Housing Division should assess options to effectively build out this capacity, balancing both urgency to ramp up production and long-term capacity building. See Action 11: “Establish underwriting capacity, requirements, and criteria to maximize public investments in housing.” This capacity does not override the legality of whether a particular tool or inventive is permissible under applicable law.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 54 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

2. Federal/state policy and programs: Numerous federal resources exist to support affordable housing

development and related objectives, such as transit-oriented development. The Departments of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and Transportation (DOT), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have funding programs and policies that can help increase housing supply and sustainability. Metro must be able to navigate the latest developments in state and federal policy, leverage connections with technical experts to ensure Nashville is able to take advantage of new programs, share information and educational resources with the development community, and work with partners, including peer cities, community development financial institutions (CDFIs), and other stakeholders to advocate for federal and state policy changes when needed. See Action 8: “Tap new and underutilized resources” and Appendix H: “New or Underutilized Funding Sources” for details on funding opportunities.

3. Data management and analysis: Monitoring, analyzing and communicating about trends and progress is

critical to achieving housing goals. The Housing Division has made notable progress towards enhancing affordable housing data management, including procuring a secure platform to store project data, developing a housing dashboard, and compiling and cleaning project data administered by the Division. However, multiple agencies are responsible for administering affordable housing programs and there lacks consistent and standardized reporting.

In April 2023, Metro Council passed ordinance BL2023-1742 directing the Metro Planning Department, through its Housing Division, to create a centralized dashboard to track funding and development and preservation of subsidized homeownership and rental housing. The ordinance defines subsidized units to include any unit funded or incentivized through Metro resources administered by a Metro agency, board, or commission, or an entity like MDHA which administers like local incentive programs and federal funds on behalf of Metro. The Housing Division has successfully created a public-facing dashboard that is updated quarterly and showcases housing market conditions as well as production of several affordable housing programs, including the Barnes Fund, Mixed Income PILOT, and LIHTC PILOT. However, partner agencies, such as OHS and MDHA largely run their own data and evaluation teams, and their analysis is not captured in the dashboard. Though there are publicly available sources, such as the National Housing Preservation Database, that provide information on affordable housing projects, such databases have limitations and adequate staffing capacity is needed to verify and clean data.

The Housing Division should collaborate with research and strategy staff in the Planning Department, at OHS, MDHA, and other key agencies to enhance tracking and analysis of market conditions and housing needs in Nashville. To be successful, Metro needs to establish data management and standardization processes and require that all relevant partners receiving General Fund allocations, or in the case of MDHA, administering federal funds and local incentive programs, are consistently sharing their data in a standard format. Gathering and cleaning this data requires significant staff time. Both requiring this reporting and adequately staffing this responsibility in each department are important first steps in improving this process. Currently, Housing Division staff focused on data collection and analysis also work several other programs and policy initiatives. To achieve this level of data management requires full-time, dedicated staff.

4. Narrative development and communications: Alongside the standardization and regularization of data

management across the entities mentioned above, Metro will need to publicize updates on market conditions and housing needs regularly to keep momentum both internally and among key external stakeholders. This is a capacity that can be delegated to existing staff or that may be supported by an external contract such as the existing Housing Dashboard contract. Relatedly, some actions include a call for more marketing of existing programs. That capacity may be delegated to existing staff or may be best suited to experienced marketers. Contracting for services for marketing can also ensure the communications are completed in a timely manner without the challenge of staff capacity being redirected toward more urgent matters.

5. Homeownership policy: At least one staff member in the Housing Division should focus on expanding

homeownership opportunities, including traditional ownership and Shared Equity ownership. This position should serve as the in-house expert on policies that support homeownership, facilitate collaboration and communication to and among key stakeholders, and spearhead new programs or initiatives to support access to or preservation of homeownership.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 55 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

6. Permanent supportive housing (PSH) strategy lead: Permanent supportive housing combines affordable

housing assistance with voluntary supportive services. PSH is intended to help those exiting homelessness obtain and maintain housing as well as improve health and connection with the community. Creating new PSH requires financing the property’s construction, operations, and associated services and can involve multiple partners from across Metro. However, Metro needs a dedicated lead agency to coordinate the overall strategy. See Action 29: “Develop a strategic plan for Permanent Supportive Housing to support annual creation of 900 PSH units for individuals experiencing or at risk of experiencing homelessness.”

7. Housing preservation: Housing preservation strategies focus on maintaining, protecting, and extending

long-term affordability. Maintaining the affordability of currently regulated affordable housing can be attained through proactive outreach and support to properties to provide tools and assistance. One full-time new or existing staff member in the Housing Division could serve in this role and be the subject matter expert on long-term affordable housing models, such as Community Land Trusts. This individual may lead many of the activities described in Strategy F: Preserve and protect long-term housing affordability and stability.

8. Monitoring and compliance systems: The Housing Division should ensure monitoring and compliance for all

projects that receive local subsidy, which includes ensuring adherence to property condition requirements, occupancy and income limits, and loan or financing terms. In some cases, this could mean coordinating with agencies like MDHA that already have robust systems, and in other cases, new systems will need to be created and staffed. Adding additional capacity for monitoring and compliance would both support the preservation strategy and allow the Housing Division to keep its dashboard up to date with accurate information.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 56 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Action 3: Invest in infrastructure that supports affordable housing and safe communities

Investing in infrastructure alongside affordable housing is critical for creating healthy, thriving communities. Currently, the lack of infrastructure (transit, water, stormwater, wastewater, energy, etc.) in Nashville impedes housing goals by prohibiting future housing development and perpetuating unsafe, disconnected community environments. The absence of adequate infrastructure like transit and sidewalks can prevent the formation of healthy, vibrant communities. More fundamentally, a lack of infrastructure can prevent new homes from being built because infrastructure, especially water and sewer, does not exist and can be extremely costly for developers, who are required to fund standard infrastructure necessary to support their projects.

In November 2024, Nashvillians approved a dedicated funding mechanism to build connection across Davidson County. The Choose How You Move Initiative (CHYM) will expand residents’ access to mobility opportunities, housing opportunities, parks, libraries, schools, and grocery stores. While CHYM cannot directly pay for new affordable housing, it will link existing and new affordable housing to jobs and other services and amenities. Currently, 41% of Nashville’s subsidized, income-restricted housing is within ¼ mile of a transit service improvement in CHYM, and Metro has the potential to add 5,500 units of housing in these areas under existing zoning.

Another potential tool to fund infrastructure is the Residential Infrastructure Development Act of 2024, enabling the creation of Infrastructure Development Districts. This tool can help finance infrastructure that supports housing and other public needs. Planning, in partnership with Metro Finance and Legal, should assess this new tool to determine its viability and value for Nashville, informed by the forthcoming Housing & Infrastructure Study.

To support the creation of infrastructure that enables safety for pedestrians and ease of access for residents with disabilities, the Housing Division should continue to offer the Connecting Housing to Infrastructure Program (CHIP) program, a cross-departmental partnership between the Housing Division and Nashville Department of Transportation (NDOT), that funds investment in Vision Zero-supportive infrastructure improvements around affordable housing properties. This initiative specifically addresses the disproportionately high rates of traffic deaths and severe injuries experienced by Nashville residents living in areas with high poverty rates, high shares of renter households, and high housing cost burden rates. Housing should enhance outreach and marketing about CHIP to ensure that developers are aware of this resource and more communities can benefit from enhanced infrastructure.

As described in Action 19b. “Continue funding the Connecting Housing and Infrastructure Program (CHIP) and identify how it can support the viability of deeply affordable projects,” the Housing Division should monitor the option of expanding eligible uses of CHIP for deeply affordable projects. Currently CHIP helps affordable housing projects to provide enhanced infrastructure, such as improved pedestrian crossings, that support critical Vision Zero and accessibility goals. To support the production of more deeply affordable housing, the Housing Division could expand the eligible uses of CHIP to include standard infrastructure such as sewer and water in addition to enhanced upgrades for projects that provide PSH or other deeply affordable homes. The Housing Division—through its underwriting capacity—could determine in the underwriting process the amount of standard infrastructure cost to cover, depending on the project gap, number of PSH units, and other available gap subsidies.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 57 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Action 4: Continue support for development partners through streamlined reviews and increased communications and marketing

Since 2019, Metro Nashville has taken steps to streamline the permitting process for affordable housing developments to better address the urgent housing needs of our community and facilitate the timely placement of housing for low- and moderate-income residents. The city began providing priority review of building permits for income-restricted affordable housing projects, and over time, the scope of eligible permits and activities— including inspections—has expanded to further support these developments.

In 2023, the Urban Land Institute’s Housing Action Council convened Metro Nashville departments to identify and resolve ongoing roadblocks in the affordable housing permitting and approval process. These discussions highlighted the importance of enhancing interdepartmental coordination to improve the expedited review process. In response, Metro Nashville’s Planning Department partnered with the Departments of Codes and Building Safety and Information Technology Services (ITS) to create a dedicated Affordable Housing permit type. This new system streamlines the process by automatically generating a permit for eligible projects. Once the Affordable Housing permit is established for a project, any subsequent related permits, such as master or building permits, are automatically associated with the expedited review process. This eliminates an extra step for developers and ensures that all Metro reviewing agencies are aware of a project’s priority status from the outset.

As a result of these improvements, Metro Nashville will now proactively set up permits for any project that received Metro subsidy, ensuring the process continues to improve.

Moving forward, Metro departments involved in permitting processes should continue to evaluate the effectiveness of these changes and work closely with the development community to refine and improve processes, ensuring the timely, safe, and high-quality development of affordable housing for Nashvillians. This should include exploring opportunities to advance cutting edge construction types and new materials for housing development.

In addition to direct support for emerging firms, stakeholder engagement revealed that even established developers can be unfamiliar with available programs and funding sources, possibly limiting access to the Mixed-Income PILOT program, the CHIP program, and resources available to support production of affordable homeownership options. The Housing Division should coordinate with other relevant agencies to ensure consistent marketing and outreach across all programs, opening the door to private partners, and seek to improve marketing and outreach to the development community for new and existing Metro programs.

As noted in the Ecosystem Analysis, Nashville has a limited number of national developers or nonprofits actively developing or managing properties and additional partners can help expand capacity. Regular engagement with the development community and consistent external communications can help to expand the pool of developers and the resources they bring to projects.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 58 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Action 5: Coordinate request-for-proposals (RFP) or intake processes for allocating resources and align reporting requirements

Nashville’s available public funds for housing are administered across multiple agencies—such as the Housing Division and MDHA—through independent application and review processes. While there is some degree of collaboration on investment decisions, a more coordinated request for proposals (RFP) or application review process could help to support strategic investments and resource utilization by enabling relevant evaluators and decision makers to assess the highest and best use of available resources against a live set of opportunities.

Additionally, a coordinated RFP would help the development community deliver more housing, more quickly. Various practitioners expressed via stakeholder engagement sessions that it can be challenging to stay up to date on available resources for housing production and preservation. Establishing a single “front door” would mitigate that challenge.

The following are examples of cities with consolidated RFP or intake processes. These examples offer opportunities for Metro and MDHA to consider with regard to coordinating efforts.

• Atlanta: The city, housing authority, Invest Atlanta, and key private funders created a common intake form for developers seeking funds. Staff from each entity meet monthly to review the pipeline, coordinate allocations, and align on key priorities and underwriting criteria.

• District of Columbia: D.C. has had a longstanding consolidated RFP process with a focus on prioritizing projects based on existing policy guided by strategic documents like the District’s Consolidated Plan, LIHTC Qualified Allocation Plan (QAP) and local affordable housing priorities (such as housing targets for each planning area) articulated in the DC Housing Equity Report. When private activity bond capacity for LIHTC projections became more competitive, District agencies further centralized the process by requiring projects seeking bond cap to be approved through the consolidated RFP process to ensure alignment with District housing priorities. Of note in this example is that DC has powers more closely aligned to THDA with regard to the QAP, which do not apply to Nashville, but this example provides coordination strategies.

Metro, led by the Housing Division, and MDHA should explore a similar coordinated process that pulls together the federal entitlement funding administered by MDHA, Barnes Fund, the award of housing vouchers by MDHA, PSH supportive services awarded by OHS, and other housing finance tools into a coordinated process. This coordinated RFP would allow for careful underwriting of public investments in affordable housing.

Federal, state and local funding will have different requirements and timelines. However, where there is the opportunity to align, the Housing Division should lead this effort to establish fluid communication patterns with partners and coordinate alignment of reporting. This will not only strengthen reporting clarity but will also make tracking and dashboard updates more seamless. Part of this work could include publishing template versions of documents including deed restrictions so partners can easily access standard documentation.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 59 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Action 6: Enhance support of emerging developers and small business enterprises

Several developer and contractor training programs exist in Nashville. Launched by the Urban League of Middle Tennessee and powered by Amazon, the R.E.D. (Real Estate Developers) Academy seeks to empower diverse developers with opportunities to grow their businesses. The MC3 (Music City Construction Careers) program focus on creating pathways to union craft building trade careers for Nashville residents, with an emphasis on serving populations historically under-represented in the construction industry. Pathway Lending hosts an emerging developers cohort to connect peers who are interested in impactful, community-focused projects. Despite these and other programs designed to create new workforce opportunities, many developers and contractors emerging from these programs and/or seeking to enter the market face challenges getting to that first project or contract or scaling their business model.

Metro Nashville’s Housing Division should continue and expand efforts aimed at increasing and diversifying Nashville’s development partners through various approaches including remaining committed to current Barnes Fund set-asides, launching new services, and exploring support for helpful models such as Joint Ownership Entities and exploring financing mechanisms for smaller projects.

Metro Nashville has already engaged in efforts to boost participation from minority-owned, women-owned, and small businesses in its affordable housing programming. The Barnes Fund, for example, has implemented policy changes to support this effort, including a 2017 collaboration with the Center for Nonprofit Management to provide one-time technical assistance to a group of 10 nonprofit affordable housing developers with a focus on strengthening organizational structure with attention to board development, financial reporting, and succession planning. This program is no longer in operation, but Action 12a “Focus the Barnes Fund to Maximize Impact” and Appendix I: “The Barnes Fund Recommended Policy and Organizational Changes” recommend a Capacity Building Track.

Additionally, to promote successful applications from small organizations, there is a specific set-aside for small organizations that Metro Council codified in Spring 2023 which requires 20% of the total Barnes Fund annual allocation be set-aside for nonprofit organizations with an annual operating budget of no more than $4 million and a housing budget of no more than $1 million.

In summer 2024, Metro Nashville was one of twenty-one communities to receive a Pathways to Removing Obstacles to Housing (PRO Housing) award from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Metro Nashville’s Housing Division received $5 million to address barriers to affordable housing production. In developing the proposed grant activities, community leaders supporting emerging developers shared with the Division that some of the major supports needed for emerging and small developers to be successful are predevelopment costs support, capacity building, and a go-to network of partners to assist with development deals. A portion of the PRO Housing award will be used to create access to predevelopment services, providing emerging and small developers and contractors access to a network of experts such as lawyers, architects, and grant writers. Faith-based institutions interested in utilizing their land for affordable housing will also have access to these predevelopment services, which will help build their capacity and transform their assets into housing. For more information on how faith-based institutions can support affordable housing in Davidson County, see Strategy B.

Joint Ownership Entities (JOEs) allow for the possibility of consolidating ownership and operation of affordable housing projects owned by small Community Development Corporations (CDC)s. By consolidating these properties and achieving efficiencies of scale in operating costs, JOEs can yield improved cash flow. In addition, they act as a co-guarantor to CDC members in securing additional affordable housing transactions, eliminating the need for CDCs to co-venture with for-profit developers. The JOE model has been most notably scaled in New York Cit but has been endorsed by Local Initiative Support Corporation (LISC) as a model to adapt in communities across the country. As described in the ecosystem assessment section, Nashville’s CDCs have mixed capacity

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 60 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

to take on development projects and the JOE structure could help build their capacity. Given JOE’s focus on capacity building it may be best coordinated with the Capacity Building Track of the Barnes Fund or supported by philanthropy or community partners.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 61 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

STRATEGY B: FORTIFY FUNDING AND RESOURCES

Optimize and grow financial and resource support for affordable housing across public, private, and philanthropic sectors

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 62 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 62

What is the focus of this strategy?

This strategy focuses on increasing the assets, including land and financial resources, to support affordable housing initiatives. Strategy B includes actions for Metro to better utilize its own assets, as well as actions for securing additional funding and support from federal and state sources, philanthropy, employers, financial institutions, and other community partners.

Why is this strategy important?

To advance affordable housing, a wide range of traditional and innovative resources are needed, not just funding, but also key factors like land availability and the optimal use of existing programs. The successful implementation of the UHS strategies depends on robust assets and financial support, particularly in Strategies C and E, which focus on expanding affordable housing for individuals earning 60% of the Area Median Income (AMI) and below. It is not financially feasible for the private market to provide housing that is affordable to Nashvillians earning these income levels, making it essential to secure sufficient public subsidies and fully leverage every available resource.

Federal, state, and local funding have not kept pace with the rising costs of providing affordable housing. Metro cannot shoulder the magnitude of funding to address Nashville’s housing needs within its budget constraints. As a result, the need for additional funding sources has become more urgent. Metro Nashville’s efforts to leverage American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds since 2021 have helped support new and existing housing programs. However, with ARPA funds set to expire by 2026, it is critical that Metro maximize the impact of current housing tools, like the Barnes Fund, and identify new, sustainable funding sources to continue and expand these vital housing initiatives. Moreover, the uncertainty surrounding future federal funding further underscores the need to maximize local assets and explore additional financial resources.

While Metro Nashville has made strides in increasing local investments in housing initiatives, it’s important to recognize that all local public funding comes from finite sources—whether through new fees, taxes, or the reallocation of funds from other essential services such as parks or mental health programs. Additionally, certain revenue sources are earmarked for specific uses, such as school improvements or road maintenance, and cannot be used for affordable housing. Given these constraints, the responsibility cannot fall solely on public funding. This strategy calls on Metro to leverage its assets and explore every possible avenue for support, while also urging new levels of collaboration with private partners – corporations, financial institutions, and philanthropic organizations – who must step up as equal partners in funding affordable housing and supportive services. Without their active involvement and financial commitment, many of the strategies and action items laid out will not be feasible. Strategy B and its related action items aim to secure and strengthen the resources necessary to ensure that all Nashvillians have a safe, affordable place to call home.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 63 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Who will this strategy serve?

Strategy B will serve Nashvillians in need of affordable housing, particularly those earning 60% of the Area Median Income (AMI) and lower, who are most impacted by the lack of affordable options. By maximizing local resources and strengthening funding partnerships, this strategy will help ensure that more affordable housing opportunities are available to those who need them the most.

How will we measure our progress?

Metric Description Source(s)

Local investments Total local dollars invested in

housing Metro Departments

Federal investments Total federal dollars invested in

housing Metro; MDHA

Partner investments Total private sector dollars invested

in housing Private Organization Philanthropic investments Total philanthropic dollars invested

in housing Philanthropic Organizations

What will it take to achieve?

Staff Time, Capacity

Underwriting

Funding and or Expertise

Capacity

Financing

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions Nashville Nashville Unified Unified Housing Housing Strategy Strategy | | 64 64

Strategy B Actions

Action 7: Explore new dedicated local and state funding sources for affordable housing and homelessness services

Meeting Nashville’s projected affordable housing needs over the next ten years would require approximately $80 million annually in local funding annually under current conditions (i.e., policy environment, underwriting, and resources). Building an underwriting capacity to more efficiently deploy public funding will help to get the most out of all available resources, but it will not eliminate the need to increase public funding to fully address Nashville’s housing needs.

All local public funding for affordable homes comes from somewhere—an increase in fee or tax, that residents or businesses must pay, subject to limitations in state law, or a reallocation of funding from another use such as parks, mental health services, or other areas. With this constraint in mind, Metro should give careful thought to which sources of funding it pursues and continue to engage with corporations, institutions, philanthropies, and others to be equal partners in the funding of affordable homes.

As described in the “Resource Analysis” section and Action 1b: “Ensure operating and capital spending plan appropriations related to housing and homelessness further the strategies and actions of the UHS and support strong housing and service delivery” and Appendix I: “Program Inventory and Profiles”, Metro and MDHA use various tools to support affordable housing development, including the Barnes Fund, gap financing programs and Payments in Lieu of Taxes (PILOTs) such as the LIHTC PILOT (administered by MDHA) and Mixed-Income PILOT (administered by Housing Division). The funding sources for the tools are varied. The Barnes Fund is almost exclusively supported by allocation from Metro’s general fund drawn from Short Term Rental (STR) revenues and property taxes and, in recent years, American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds. The allocation is done on a discretionary basis through the annual budget process, with Metro Council needing to approve funding each year. Federal entitlement funds such as Community Development Block Grant (CBDG) and HOME are deployed by MDHA, and the PILOTs are an abatement of property taxes, which impact revenue collection and, ultimately, the Metro budget.

In addition to funding affordable housing, there is also a growing need to support homelessness services. A critical funding source for homelessness services comes from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) which funds local initiatives to end homelessness through the Continuum of Care (CoC) Program Competition. The Office of Homeless Services (OHS) serves as the primary applicant to the CoC Program competition. The availability of CoC funding is subject to change dependent on the administration. Notably, ARPA funds have also been used in recent years to fund support services and shelter operations; local ARP funds are set to expire at the end of 2026, while the HOME ARP funds for supportive services ends September 30, 2030. As Metro seeks to advance permanent supportive housing, there will also be a growing need to identify sources to fund both operating costs and supportive services, both of which are essential components of PSH and work together to prevent individuals once chronically homeless from entering homelessness again. While Medicaid cannot pay for housing development or rent, it can support services for enrollees to find and sustain housing. To access such services for Tennessee Medicaid patients, though, the state would need to pursue a waiver, such as a 1115 Demonstration Waiver, which has been a critical resource in funding supportive services in other states across the county. Metro could work with other local governments and stakeholders to advocate for state involvement to pursue such a waiver.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 65 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville’s 2021 Affordable Housing Task Force Report proposed a number of dedicated sources for affordable housing, including an increase to the sales tax inside the Tourism Development Zone, redirecting a portion or all of the Real Estate Transfer Tax, a bond issuance fee, and increasing short-term rental (STR) fees and charges, among others. Some of these, like bond issuance fees and the STR fee, were put in place, and STR revenues now support the Barnes Fund in part. However, most of these are not viable paths. See Appendix H for the Analysis of Potential Revenue Sources.

Metro should explore a combination of discretionary funds approved by Metro Council annually while adding in a combination of housing bonds and dedicated sources to scale the level of local public funds to be in line with the level of challenges Nashville faces with the cost of homes. All potential revenue sources outlined in Appendix H require State Law change, and some are restricted for other uses.

In March 2025, Metro Council passed RS2025-1101 requesting the Department of Finance and the Housing Division to research and determine the feasibility of the creation of a revolving loan fund to issue loans for affordable housing that allow for smaller investments from members of the Nashville community. Metro will embark on this research in Fiscal Year 2026.

There are other sources that are not a viable or priority option for Metro at this point because of one or more of the considerations above. Unclaimed lottery winnings, construction excise tax, parking tax, vacancy tax, permit fees, motor vehicle registration fee, and others will not be prioritized by Metro because of limits of state law and the relatively modest amount of funding they are likely to generate.

Of the potential revenue sources, the Realty Transfer Tax and Realty Mortgage Tax are the strongest options, but each has limits and obstacles to supporting the development and preservation of affordable homes.

Realty Transfer Tax

The State of Tennessee already collects a Realty Transfer Tax of 37 cents for every $100 of real estate value transferred. This generates about $14 million a year in tax revenue. Metro could work with the State to have a portion of this tax allocated to Metro, or it could work with the State to have a local Realty Transfer Tax added. Metro intends to focus on pursuing a local realty transfer tax. Such a tax has been considered by State policy makers before, and creating the option for a local Realty Transfer Tax would not require the State to give up funds it relies on.i

If Metro were to adopt a tax of 50 cents for every $100 of real estate value for residential properties worth over $500,000, it would generate around $23 million a year at the average level of real estate activity from 2022 to 2023.ii This is a significant source of funding to support affordable housing. One weakness is that the amount of funding will ebb and flow with the real estate market. When there are fewer sales or prices are down, the amount of funding generated will decrease.

Many communities rely on a dedicated source of funding, a tax or fee that is dedicated to create and preserve affordable homes. Some examples include:

• The District of Columbia’s Housing Production Trust Fund (HPTF) receives an annual deposit of dedicated deed recordation and deed transfer taxes collected by the District. In total, 15 percent of these tax revenues are dedicated to the HPTF, a portion of which is dedicated to repayment of revenue bonds, and the balance of which is deposited directly into the HPTF, without being transferred through the General Fund.vi

• The City and County of Denver, Colorado, dedicates a portion of its property taxes to housing and charges a one-time impact fee on development.

• Additionally, in November 2024, Los Angeles County voters approved a half-cent sales tax to fund homelessness and affordable housing. Generating over $1 billion annually, Measure A funding will be shared by LA County, cities and councils of government, the Los Angeles County Development Authority (LACDA), and the Los Angeles County Affordable Housing Solutions Agency (LACAHSA), a body made up of leaders including the LA County Supervisors, elected officials representing cities countywide, as well as nonprofit and community leaders.vii

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 66

By setting the threshold for the tax at $500,000 and scaling it up based on property value, it has a more equitable impact, with more funding coming from those with greater means. This avoids creating a barrier to accessing homeownership for moderate income households. A home sold for $625,000 would only require a one-time tax of $625—hardly enough to impact a household’s ability to qualify for a mortgage.

Metro could also establish an exemption from this local tax for properties with an affordability requirement to ensure that it does not adversely impact the development or sale of affordable for-sale or rental homes.

Metro needs the State of Tennessee’s authorization to adopt such a local fee, and this is the key obstacle to this funding source. Tennessee’s State Assembly would have to approve Metro’s ability to establish this fee and the affordability exemption.

Realty Mortgage Tax

Similar to the Realty Transfer Tax, the Realty Mortgage Tax is already in place and is under the control of the State and not Metro. Metro could choose to pursue a portion of this tax or push for an additional local tax. The important differences are that it could include refinancing of property, not just sales, allowing for a broader number of properties to be taxed. The drawback is that it will not cover cash purchases, since there is not a mortgage, so it would be less equitable. Metro could include the option of a local Realty Mortgage Tax as it engages with the State, but should favor the Realty Transfer Tax, all things being equal.

Figure 24: Evaluation of Potential Funding Sources

Realty Transfer Tax Realty Mortgage Tax

Scale

High – It is possible to generate tens of millions High of dollars in revenue from this source with only

a modest tax relative to the cost of homes.

– the scale is smaller than the Realty Transfer Tax if restricted to new sales; if refinancing is included this is significantly larger.

Speed High – this could be put in place immediately or

phased in over a few years.

High – this could be put in place immediately or phased in over a few years.

Flexibility

Medium – restrictions are tied to overall state laws about how public funds are used and any requirements imposed as part of getting legislation passed to allow Metro to access this funding source for affordable housing.

Feasibility

Medium – restrictions are tied to overall state laws about how public funds are used and any requirements imposed as part of getting legislation passed to allow Metro to access this funding source for affordable housing.

Medium – this source appears to require new state law that would authorize a local add on to the Realty Transfer Tax.

Medium – this source appears to require new state law that would authorize a local add on to the Mortgage Recordation Tax.

Predictability Medium – as property sales rise or fall the level

of funding will move with them

Low- mortgage originations are closely tied to interest rates with dramatic peaks and troughs.

Equity Impacts

High – the price at which a home is covered by the fee can be set high to avoid creating a barrier to homeownership for lower- and moderate-income households.

High – the mortgage amount that is covered by the fee can be set high to avoid creating a barrier to homeownership or refinancing for lower- and moderate-income households.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 67

Revenue from Activated Public Land or Previously Exempted Property

For properties not already pledged or encumbered, Metro could direct a portion of property taxes collected on local, state, and federal property or on other non-exempt property added or returned to Metro’s tax rolls toward affordable housing. Metro already directs proceeds from the sale of tax delinquent properties to the Barnes Fund and could direct a portion of proceeds from other property sales and revenue from ground leases for affordable housing initiatives.

Action 8: Tap new and underutilized resources

Nashville has an opportunity to tap into new or underutilized resources, including sources of funding or land assets, that can support affordable housing production and preservation. Appendix H: “New or Underutilized Funding Sources” includes a table of potential federal funding sources that could be explored. These sources, which include HUD Section 108 Loan and Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act loans, present varying levels of potential benefit and effort, and some may require education for the development community. Notably, there is uncertainty about the future of several of the federally funded sources and whether they will remain available under new administrations. Metro should assess the applicability and cost/benefit of these sources to ensure that it maximizes available resources that can be utilized for housing. The table in Appendix F describes the resources and the entities that could pursue them.

In addition to new funding sources, Metro should also seek other resources that can support housing production and preservation, such as partnerships with institutional land holders, including faith-based institutions. According to a recent report published by the Urban Institute, faith-based institutions are significant land holders in Nashville, owning over 3,000 acres of land – 57% of which could be converted into housing. There has been growing momentum among the faith community to explore whether their underutilized land could be repurposed to support affordable housing efforts. Following the release of the report, ThinkTennessee, in partnership with ULI Nashville, the Urban League of Middle Tennessee, Hawkins Partners, Inc., Urban Housing Solutions, ClearBlue Company, and others collaborated on a series of three resource guides intended to help congregations understand the basics of housing development and determine their potential and priorities. Building on these initial efforts, Metro’s Housing Division was recently awarded a federal Pathways to Removing Obstacles to Housing (PRO Housing grant), which will enable the Division to identify and contract with a partner to provide targeted technical assistance to faith-based institutions interested in exploring how their properties can be leveraged to address housing needs. The Housing Division and other relevant partners should continue to support these institutions and engage in conversations and partnerships with others, such as academic and health care institutions, that also hold land assets. These partnerships represent a critical opportunity to expand the inventory of developable land for housing and build broader coalitions around housing solutions.

Did you know that faith-based institutions own 3,491 acres of land in Davidson County? A recent report found that 57% of this land has potential to be utilized for new homes. The Housing Division recently received a federal PRO Housing grant to help faith- based institutions prepare to use their land for affordable housing.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 68

Action 9: Attract mission-motivated capital and corporate partners

Every affordable housing development that Metro funds also involves private capital, with the exception of Strobel House. Metro solely financed the construction of 91 units, plus community spaces, on Metro-owned land. The project, which does not include structured parking, cost over $28,000,000. The Barnes Fund projects leverage example of 9:1 could likely have leveraged Metro’s funds by $252,000,000 and resulted in 1,000 new homes. Therefore, increasing the amount of private capital being invested to build affordable homes in Nashville is necessary to scale up the number of homes being built.

A growing number of institutions and organizations are moving capital toward mission motivated investments. These sources of capital are able to support a public good, like affordable housing, while also earning a return on their investment. Organizations with mission-motivated capital are willing to accept a lower return for an investment in exchange for the public good that results. In practice this means the capital might be invested in a construction loan to build an apartment building in exchange for limiting the rent to a level that is affordable to a household earning $50,000. To do so, they will charge an interest rate of 3% as opposed to the market rate of 6%. The discount on the cost of mission-motivated capital helps to make it possible to keep homes affordable and allow limited public funding to stretch further and achieve more impact. One local example of this type of investment is Vanderbilt University’s investment in the Nashville Catalyst Fund. They invested $5,000,000 and are accepting a lower return on their investment in order to support affordable housing in Nashville. The shared leadership by Metro and the Community Foundation of Middle Tennessee were essential to supporting Vanderbilt’s investment and all parties should build on this collaboration and momentum to recruit additional mission-motivated investment into the sector.

Metro should engage with organizations who have mission-motivated capital and work with them to invest more of that capital to build and preserve affordable homes in Nashville. This could include banks who are motivated by the federal Community Reinvestment Act and the state Community Investment Tax Credit to invest in affordable housing as well as foundations, large corporations, universities, hospitals, and other community institutions.

The Housing Division should also work closely with Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) whose purpose is to raise and invest mission motivated capital. Nashville has strong local and regional CDFIs such as Pathway Lending and The Housing Fund, but there are no local offices for a national CDFI in Nashville currently. Metro should work to engage national CDFIs and deepen its partnerships with local and regional CDFIs.

Partner organizations such as those listed above or CDFIs can bring the added advantage of being better able to raise private capital and secure philanthropic investments. The City of Charlotte entered into a partnership with the Local Initiative Support Corporation (LISC), a national CDFI, to operate the Charlotte Housing Opportunity Investment Fund and leverage both LISC’s ability to bring private capital to invest in affordable housing and its abilities to underwrite and structure complicated affordable housing transactions. The City of Atlanta relies primarily on Invest Atlanta, its economic development authority, to raise private and mission driven capital for affordable housing and then underwrite and structure investments in affordable housing. The City of San Diego takes a similar approach, but relies on the San Diego Housing Commission, the public housing authority for the City. Metro should give close consideration to models employed in other jurisdictions as it assesses the best approach to take to build underwriting capacity.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 69 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Action 10: Build strategic partnerships with philanthropic sector

The philanthropic sector in Nashville has historically focused their giving on grants for critical services. The foundations meet regularly and seek to collaborate on giving in order to maximize their impact. In addition to their essential grant making processes, a handful of foundations have sought to expand their impact through impact investing. The first impact investing collaboration for affordable housing in Nashville was a partnership between Urban Housing Solutions, Regions Bank, The Kharis Foundation, Memorial Foundation, the Healing Trust, and the James Stephen Turner Family Foundation. This process grew the knowledge and expertise of the philanthropic sector for affordable housing impact investment.

In 2023, Metro partnered with the Community Foundation of Middle Tennessee to launch the Nashville Catalyst Fund, which combines public funds with mission-motivated capital to offer loans to develop and preserve affordable homes. It is a proven model for partnership as Metro’s initial $20 million grant was joined by nine additional investors to create a total fund size of $76.5 million. Metro’s initial investment, strategic leadership, and expertise in housing were essential components to attract additional partners. Likewise, the partners worked diligently to develop an understanding of the model and impact and leveraged their relational capital and area expertise to join Metro in investing in affordable housing.

Metro should strengthen their partnership with the philanthropic sector and seek to collaborate on funding, knowledge sharing, and coordination. The philanthropic sector’s grant funding should be focused on services and housing for the highest need and lowest income populations. As the foundations grow their comfort with impact investing, their return-generating investments can support affordable housing creation and provide critical funding to fill gaps in the capital stack.

Throughout the UHS, philanthropy’s essential role is elevated to showcase specific areas and initiatives where their unique structure and expertise is needed. These areas can be found in the Appendix J: “Philanthropic Contribution Opportunities” as a reference tool that can be built on and expanded as the sector and the needs evolve.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 70 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Action 11: Establish underwriting capacity, requirements, and criteria to maximize public investments in housing

Underwriting is an essential process used to evaluate whether and how public resources should be invested in a specific affordable housing project and a prerequisite to being able to access the more sophisticated financial tools Metro needs to explore to expand the number of affordable homes built and preserved. It should be noted that the legality of the use of a public resource or incentive must be considered before applying underwriting criteria.

The underwriting process involves due diligence to determine whether proposed developments actually require public funding, the form of public funding required, or whether the deal can secure financing from other sources. Underwriting professionals use their knowledge of real estate development and housing finance to size the appropriate amount and type of subsidy and identify and mitigate risks to project delivery (i.e., the success of the investment).

As Metro’s underwriting capacity grows, it will be able to engage with partner organizations and explore accessing the bond market, mission-driven investment vehicles, and other tools that are not being used at scale in Nashville currently. Metro needs these more sophisticated tools to scale the development of affordable rental homes beyond what LIHTC can support.12

Building public sector underwriting capacity is a multi-year process, and Metro should move through the following stages as it builds this capacity up over time.

• Contract or hire staff with a background in affordable housing lending. Hiring for positions with these financial skills is often difficult for local governments because of the competition in the market for these skills, and Metro may choose to contract in the near-term while it establishes an appropriate position type for this role and conducts a search. This capacity will focus on supporting the allocation of Metro’s existing housing tools—Barnes Fund, Mixed-Income PILOT, etc. Any MOU among Metro partners should establish who holds this contract.

• Partner with affiliated entities such as the MDHA, IDB, Catalyst Fund, and potentially other organizations to put under contract firms who are municipal financial advisors, lawyers, and fund managers that are familiar with structuring 501c3 bonds, FHA risk share products, and more complicated financial products. MDHA and the Catalyst Fund each already have some of this capacity under contract. The Housing Division should work with them to evaluate whether the existing firms under contract meet the needs to move forward the execution of more complicated tools.

Over the longer term and in coordination with any MOUs that increase Metro collaboration, the Housing Division can work to expand the underwriting capacity internally and to establish or identify a partner organization that can help it scale its capacity to underwrite and structure investments in affordable housing at the volume and level of sophistication needed to address Nashville’s housing challenges.

12 Metro’s underwriting expands, Metro Legal will need to be consulted when determining which incentive tools are permissible under applicable law.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 71 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Action 12: Position existing housing tools to align with UHS priorities

To most effectively address Nashville’s housing priorities, Metro will need to consider all available tools, including those that are not explicitly tools for housing. As a first priority, this will include refining tools that currently exist to ensure that they are designed to most effectively address housing priorities that they are well suited to serve. Second, Metro and partners such as MDHA, Health and Education Facilities Board (HEFB), East Bank Development Authority (EBDA), and Industrial Development Board (IDB), should assess economic development tools that can support housing, such as TIFs and PILOTs. Ultimately, however, the extent to which Metro deploys these tools depends upon fiscal and legal constraints.

Action 12a: Focus the Barnes Fund to maximize its impact

In 2013, Metro Nashville established its first housing trust, the Barnes Housing Trust Fund, to expand affordable housing resources across the county. Since its creation, the Barnes Fund has awarded more than $160 million to 40 nonprofit developers, resulting in the creation or preservation of over 6,000 affordable housing units. Named in honor of Rev. Bill Barnes, a dedicated community advocate for affordable housing, the Barnes Fund continues his mission of ensuring housing opportunities for all Nashvillians. The Metro Housing Trust Fund Commission oversees the fund to ensure its grants align with this mission and are administered responsibly. The Housing Division has dedicated staff who are responsible for administering the program and is responsive to the Commission.

As Nashville’s most significant and flexible source of local

Recommended Barnes Fund Allocation

affordable housing subsidy, the Barnes Fund often plays a pivotal role in the funding process of affordable housing by contributing the first grant funds to a capital stack. While Barnes’

• Year 1: $30 Million

• Year 5: Scale up to $55M work has been impactful, review of past grants and project financials, agreement terms, and feedback from stakeholders suggest that these resources could be deployed more strategically and efficiently in order to make greater progress on affordable housing production and preservation objectives and build mission-driven affordable housing expertise within the Nashville ecosystem.

Stakeholder feedback shared to inform the UHS revealed that there are opportunities to better align the Fund’s strategic focus with Nashville’s housing priorities, and that many developers who could make an important contribution to Nashville’s affordable housing goals do not know how to or cannot access the Fund.

To address these challenges and maximize the impact of the Barnes Fund, the following changes are proposed:

1. Organize the Barnes Fund around the housing priorities established in the UHS by establishing three tracks:

Affordable Rental Homes, Homeownership, Capacity Building;

2. Introduce a dedicated underwriting process that assesses request for funding;

3. Strengthen the public benefit terms required by Barnes Funding; and

4. Establish processes to coordinate Barnes Funding with Metro’s housing priorities and tools.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 72

An overview of the three tracks is shown to the side. For additional details on the proposed changes included below as well as suggested budget allocations for each track, please refer to Appendix G: “The Barnes Fund Recommended Policy and Organizational Changes.” Please note, policy changes may require the approval of the Metropolitan Housing Trust Fund Commission and/or Metro Council.

Action 12b: Make affordable housing a threshold-eligibility requirement to access Tax Increment Financing and Payment-in-Lieu of Taxes for residential and mixed-use projects

Tax Increment Financing (TIFs) is a funding mechanism where a local government uses anticipated future increases in tax revenues to finance current improvements, such as new or improved infrastructure, that are expected to generate those increased revenues. With a traditional TIF, a local government establishes a district and utilizes the funds from the tax increment generated in that district to either repay the debt incurred or reimburse a developer for the costs of public improvements required to enable private development in the district. TIF may be used to facilitate new rental and for-sale housing.

MDHA, IDB, and the new East Bank Development Authority have the ability to authorize TIFs. Metro should work with these entities and Council to ensure that projects seeking TIF support for residential and mixed-use development include some level of affordable housing. This practice was implemented in the 2000s by Mayor Bill Purcell to incentivize people to move to downtown. At that time, developers utilizing TIF for residential development were required to make 20% of homes affordable at 80% or below AMI for 5 years. With Nashville’s current housing needs, Metro should set minimum criteria in each TIF project involving residential development to further the UHS’s housing goals with affordability terms running for the period of the TIF loan.

Affordable Rental Home Track

• Focus on producing rental homes for households earning up to 60% of the AMI and addressing supply gaps and invest in critical preservation projects.

• Prioritize developing housing for households earning 30% of the AMI or below and PSH units.

• Allow both nonprofit and for-profit developers with the necessary capabilities to compete for funding.

• Require stewardship plans for all awarded projects to ensure affordability.

• Projects fully underwritten to determine funding amounts and terms.

• Awards may include grants, soft-pay, and hard-pay debt, with for-profit organizations ineligible for grants.

Homeownership Track

• Focus on developing for-sale homes, providing financial assistance to first- generation homeowners, and support rehabilitation of owner-occupied homes.

• Prioritize first-generation homeowners in neighborhoods of opportunity.

• Allow nonprofit organizations focused on affordable homeownership and rebuilding disinvested communities to compete for funding. Partnerships with for-profits to be allowed.

• Projects fully underwritten to determine funding amounts and terms.

• Awards may include grants, soft-pay, or hard-pay debt, with for-profit partner ineligible for grants.

Capacity Building Track

• Focus on building the capacity and expertise of nonprofit affordable housing developers and operators.

• Allow nonprofit developers or affordable housing operators/managers with annual budgets up to $4 million to apply.

• Projects may be subject to underwriting and impact metrics related to organizational capacity building.

• Awards will include reimbursable grants.

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 73

Payment-in-Lieu of Taxes (PILOT) is a financial arrangement in which a developer makes a payment to Metro instead of property taxes, at a reduced rate. Metro offers 2 PILOT programs specifically designed to create and preserve income-restricted affordable housing – LIHTC PILOT and Mixed-Income PILOT. However, where Metro seeks to utilize a PILOT to incentivize other economic development projects that include housing not through the LIHTIC PILOT or Mixed-Income PILOT programs, Metro should require a percentage of the housing to be income- restricted for the term of the PILOT.

Metro should utilize underwriting to ensure TIFs and PILOTs are necessary and further Metro’s goals. See Action 11: “Establish underwriting capacity, requirements, and criteria to maximize public investments in housing.”

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 74 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

STRATEGY C: BUILD NEW HOUSING

Create a range of new and affordable housing choices for all Nashvillians as appropriate across the county

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 75 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

What is the focus of this strategy?

Strategy C seeks to increase the total amount of housing in Nashville. The strategy includes actions to build more market-rate and affordable housing with a focus on building affordable rental housing that meets the needs of those with low to moderate-incomes. Housing options should be thought of as a continuum—with a variety of options that appeal to people at different income levels and life stages, from young adults to working families to seniors. These options should also be available across a range of neighborhoods and geographies, ensuring people can find housing near jobs, schools, transit, and other amenities. Actions proposed as part of Strategy C, in conjunction with the other strategies, seek to increase housing options in Nashville and serve the diverse needs of people who want to live in our community.

Why is this strategy important?

Within the Nashville market, there is demand for additional homes at all income levels. When Nashville’s demand exceeds supply, housing prices rise and affordability decreases. Many Nashvillians, including paramedics, childcare staff, restaurant employees, and teachers, can’t afford the average rent. Those struggling to pay for housing often face tough choices between housing and other essentials, like food, transportation, and healthcare. For Nashville to have a healthy housing market, it must build enough homes to accommodate the increase in the number of households, and those homes need to be priced to reflect the wages that the jobs in Nashville’s economy pay.

Despite recent efforts to add affordable housing, Nashville still faces a shortage. As discussed in the “How Much Housing Do We Need” section, HR&A estimated that Nashville would benefit from adding an additional 20,000 homes affordable to households earning 60% of the Area Median Income (AMI) or below over the next 10 years. By adding more affordable rental homes over the next 10 years while preserving existing affordable housing, Nashville will be on track to close the existing rental shortage affordable at 60% AMI. The actions in this strategy seek to expand affordable housing options, particularly for households earning less than 60% of the AMI, with a focus on those earning 0-30%. Creating more affordable housing will ensure that our neighbors who help us in an emergency, care for our children, provide us meals, and teach our students have a safe and affordable place to live in Nashville.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 76 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 76

Who will this strategy serve?

This strategy will serve all Nashvillians with a focus on those earning low to moderate incomes. Actions specific to building more affordable housing are focused on serving those earning 60% AMI or below and meeting the needs of vulnerable residents. Specific actions will focus on creating deeply affordable rental homes for those earning the lowest incomes.

How will we measure our progress?

Metric Description Source(s)

Affordable Housing Production – Rental

Total number of new affordable rental homes funded for development by affordability level (i.e., Area Median Income (AMI) bracket)

Metro Housing Division; MDHA; Developer Community

Rental Housing Gap by Income

The number of housing units available by AMI level versus the number of rental units affordable at that income level

Census, American Community Survey; Public Use Microdata Sample

Housing Cost Burden

The percentage of renters by demographic and special populations that are cost burdened (i.e., spending more than 30% of gross income on housing costs)

Census, American Community Survey

Jobs: Homes Ratio

The ratio of net new jobs added in the market compared to the number of new homes added

Bureau of Labor Statistics; Metro Planning/Codes

Percentage of Homes Affordable to Median Renter

The percentage of homes that are affordable to a renter earning the median income

Census, American Community Survey; Public Use Microdata Sample Vacancy Rate The share of rental homes that are

vacant and available to occupy CoStar

What will it take to achieve?

Staff Time, Capacity or Expertise

Underwriting Capacity

Funding or Financing

Data

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 77

Strategy C Actions

Action 13: Evaluate and adjust zoning and land use policies to unlock development opportunities, expand housing types, and increase annual housing production.

Land use policy is an important tool to support the creation of not only more homes but also more naturally affordable homes, a greater variety of housing types, and sustainable, resilient neighborhoods. Conversely, land use policies can function as an effective constraint on a city’s overall supply of housing. When large land areas of a city are zoned as single-family, with a large minimum lot size, for example, this serves as a firm upper bound on the number of housing units that these neighborhoods can support, regardless of an area’s overall population growth or underlying housing demand. Restrictive zoning also limits opportunities to develop housing near essential services and transit, reinforcing car dependency and increasing household transportation costs. At the same time, many areas in Nashville that are zoned for density, such as Downtown and Midtown, rely on expensive high-rise construction, making for more expensive multifamily in the places it is allowed.

Effective zoning and land use policies can unlock development opportunities by distributing land costs among multiple housing units, enabling lower-cost construction typologies, and meeting housing needs with less need for public subsidy. Transit-oriented development (TOD) is a particularly powerful approach to align land use with infrastructure investments by encouraging higher-density, mixed-use housing within half a mile walking distance to public transit. This model not only increases housing supply but also reduces forced reliance on cars, lowers transportation costs, and promotes more sustainable growth. Planning will identify the adjustments that are needed to land use policies through the Housing and Infrastructure study. Metro should prioritize zoning changes that reduce barriers to affordable housing, expand housing options, and align with infrastructure investments to foster equitable, connected, and resilient communities.

Expanding areas where multifamily housing is allowed, in alignment with the NashvilleNext Growth and Preservation Map, is a key strategy to support the development of more rental affordable homes and diversify housing types. Currently, most land available for affordable housing rental development is located along commercial corridors, where developers must compete with both commercial uses and market-rate multifamily projects. This competition drives up land costs, especially since commercially zoned property is often more expensive than residentially zoned land across much of the county. By encouraging multifamily development in transit-served areas and neighborhoods with existing infrastructure capacity, Metro can promote sustainable growth while increasing access to jobs, services, and public amenities.

In addition to supporting affordability more broadly, adjusting land use policies to allow middle multifamily housing on lower-cost residential land can reduce the cost of entitling projects and open new areas for affordable housing development. This approach not only enables affordable housing developers to pursue projects in a wider range of neighborhoods—reducing the concentration of affordable housing in any one community—but also allows public subsidies to stretch further and serve more residents.

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 78 UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

In addition to the zoning code, Metro will also look at specific areas of policy opportunity and concern. Additional adjustments to zoning and land use that impact housing include allowing accessory dwelling units (ADUs) which can create new, affordable opportunities for renters within a variety of neighborhoods and strongly regulating where short-term rentals are allowed.

While this action is primarily focused on the role of land use in advancing rental options, “Action 21: Leverage land use to expand the availability of entry-level homeownership” focuses on homeownership.

Action 14: Implement voluntary zoning incentives for attainable housing

In Spring 2024, the Tennessee General Assembly approved legislation authorizing municipalities to provide voluntary zoning incentives to promote attainable housing development as a response to the stressed housing market. Voluntary incentive programs create affordable homes within new market rate developments by offering incentives in exchange. These incentives can enable developers to build a wider variety of housing types across the income spectrum. Examples of incentives include increases in density, reduced parking minimums, and reduced building setbacks in exchange for affordability requirements for housing. The design of a voluntary incentive program must consider various components, illustrated below, including the affordability of homes, the appropriate incentives to offset developer costs, and administrative needs and processes.

Figure 25: Voluntary Incentive Program Components

Policy Components Administration

Affordability ponents Com- Affordability Level Portion of Units Length of Affordability

With voluntary incentive programs, if there is a gap between affordable rents and those required to keep a project financially feasible, then no developer will take the incentive, and no affordable rental homes will be built. Each of these components helps to ensure that voluntary incentive programs appropriately balance the cost to the developer of including affordable homes in the project and the benefit that they receive through the incentive. Adequately balancing the cost and incentives encourages developers to take advantage of the program, ensuring that affordable homes are delivered in the market. Because they are voluntary, the overall impact of these programs is limited, but they can be a powerful addition to leverage deeper or additional affordability, particularly when combined with other mixed-income financing tools, as the previous section illustrates. In that hypothetical project, a 10% density bonus combined with a PILOT, below-market senior debt, and must-pay subordinate debt transforms 150 market-rate homes to a project with 85 market-rate homes and 80 homes affordable at 60% AMI. While State law uses the term “attainable housing,” municipalities may define attainable; Metro should define “attainable” to be consistent with and advance the goals of the UHS.

Geography

Voluntary IZ Locations

Incentives

Appropriate Incentives Size of Incentives Length of Incentives

Administrative Policy

Process Guidelines Development Approvals Program Management

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 79

Metro may want to look to Opportunity Zones (OZs) as areas to focus voluntary housing incentives. Enacted as part of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, OZs were designed to attract long-term private capital into distressed communities. While not a primary tool to create affordable housing, a working paper from Economic Innovation Group found that the OZ incentive roughly doubled the number of housing units in these areas between 2019 and 2024. It is expected that OZ’s incentives are to be extended and renewed in 2025, but affordability requirements are not expected to be included. Therefore, providing voluntary housing incentives in OZs – where development is likely to come – is a way to achieve some level of affordability.

Finally, Metro should evaluate the degree to which the new law allows Metro to offer developers the option to pay into an affordable housing fund in exchange for the zoning incentive. It is often possible to create more affordable homes when they are not located in high-cost new construction buildings, and this option might be a useful source of funding to create and preserve affordable homes.

Figure 26: Balancing Incentives and Affordability Requirements

Incentives set too low

...while incentives set will not ensure project

too high will result in lost feasibility...

potential affordable units.

Incentives

Incentives

Required Rent Incentives

Affordable Rent

Affordable Rent

Affordable Rent

Market-Rate Rent

Market-Rate Rent

Market-Rate Rent

UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville Unified Housing Strategy | 80

  
  
[/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version 20.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign ClipboardScrap1.pdf](/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version%2020.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign%20ClipboardScrap1.pdf)   
[/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version 20.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign ClipboardScrap1.pdf](/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version%2020.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign%20ClipboardScrap1.pdf)   
[/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version 20.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign ClipboardScrap1.pdf](/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version%2020.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign%20ClipboardScrap1.pdf)   
[/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version 20.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign ClipboardScrap1.pdf](/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version%2020.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign%20ClipboardScrap1.pdf)   
[/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version 20.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign ClipboardScrap1.pdf](/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version%2020.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign%20ClipboardScrap1.pdf)   
[/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version 20.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign ClipboardScrap1.pdf](/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version%2020.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign%20ClipboardScrap1.pdf)   
[/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version 20.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign ClipboardScrap1.pdf](/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version%2020.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign%20ClipboardScrap1.pdf)   
[/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version 20.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign ClipboardScrap1.pdf](/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version%2020.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign%20ClipboardScrap1.pdf)   
[/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version 20.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign ClipboardScrap1.pdf](/C/Users/acattkisson/AppData/Local/Adobe/InDesign/Version%2020.0/en_US/Caches/InDesign%20ClipboardScrap1.pdf)   
<https://publicinput.com/Customer/File/Full/d859c9db-e3b7-4eb4-a5b2-32e339e7afb5>   
<https://nashville.uli.org/technical-assistance-panel-report-sustaining-nashville-building-sustainability-and-resilience-into-affordable-housing/>   
<https://www.nashville.gov/departments/finance/reports/short-term-rental-property-tax-reports>   
<https://www.nashville.gov/departments/finance/reports/short-term-rental-property-tax-reports>   
<https://www.atlantahousing.org/real-estate/co-investment-fund/>   
<https://dhcd.dc.gov/publication/2023-consolidated-request-proposals-affordable-housing-projects>   
<https://www.dchfa.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/11.15.22_new_bond_process_slide_deck.pdf>   
<https://www.lisc.org/our-stories/story/model-worth-copying-joint-ownership-structures-cdcs/>   
[#126](#126)   
[#126](#126)   
[#126](#126)   
[#126](#126)   
<https://www.urban.org/research/publication/promoting-affordable-housing-partnerships-nashville>   
<https://www.thinktennessee.org/housing-resource-guides/>   
<https://www.thinktennessee.org/housing-resource-guides/>   