Unified Housing Strategy
April 2025
Executive Summary

Nashville has long been a city that attracts families, individuals, and businesses drawn to its dynamic economy, 
connected communities, and unique neighborhoods. For decades, people have come here to build their lives, 
expand economic opportunities, and become part of a city that blends culture, innovation, and a strong sense of 
belonging. However, as Nashville’s success has accelerated, so too have its housing challenges—threatening to 
become a barrier to the very prosperity that has made our city thrive.
This document makes clear that Nashville’s housing landscape is defined by both opportunities and challenges. 
The need is immense, and the Metropolitan Government of Nashville-Davidson County (Metro) cannot tackle it 
alone - no government entity can. The Unified Housing Strategy (UHS) is an open palm and call to action, inviting 
the philanthropic, corporate, public, and private sectors to partner with Metro in addressing Nashville’s housing 
needs. The next phase of this effort will be a working collaboration, building on the analysis presented in the UHS. 
Working towards a shared vision takes investment and time – but it is well worth the effort as partnership has the 
potential to increase our collective impact.  The Community Foundation of Middle Tennessee is taking a lead role 
in this work, securing funding for a facilitated leadership group to magnify and enhance the work that Imagine 
Nashville and the UHS have begun.
Importantly, the UHS is a living strategy, designed to evolve alongside Nashville’s shifting economic, policy, 
and housing landscape. As of this writing, the federal government policy continuity in a wide range of housing, 
homelessness, and social support is evolving and government funding at previous levels may not be sustained. 
A deeply uncertain economic environment and subsequent federal policy actions could pull on all our partners— 
public, philanthropic and for -profit entities—impacting efforts in ways we aren’t yet anticipating. As conditions 
shift, so too must the approaches used to address affordability and housing stability, ensuring that the city 
remains resilient in the face of uncertainty
Housing security is economic security, for individuals 
and families, as well as the city itself.  Housing’s 
importance to the overall economy cannot be 
overstated. According to the U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce, the housing shortage not only burdens 
homeowners and renters, but has cost states billions in 
economic output, personal income, and jobs. Further, 
the U.S. Chamber reports that in Tennessee alone, the 
economic housing shortage has resulted in $8.42 billion 
in lost economic output, $5.41 billion in less personal 
income, and over 70,000 jobs not generated from 2008-
2025. Addressing housing challenges is essential for 
stabilizing markets and supporting long-term economic 
growth.
Sustained population and economic growth have 
increased pressure on housing affordability across 
Davidson County with uneven impacts on different 
neighborhoods and demographic groups across the 
socioeconomic spectrum. In recent years, home values 
and rents have risen faster than most household 
incomes. Rent growth has outpaced incomes over 
the past five years, particularly for renters without a 
college degree, who face an almost $900 gap between 
the median rent and what they can afford. This 
trend is also true for homeowners. While affordable 
homeownership was once an advantage in Davidson 
County, home values have surged more than 40% since 
2019, while incomes have grown only by 19%, making 
homeownership increasingly unattainable for those 
earning under $100,000 annually.
Housing Division Application
•	 Affordable housing - housing restricted to 
households earning ≤80% AMI
State Definitions*
•	 Affordable housing - Housing that, on an 
annual basis, costs 30% or less than the 
estimated median household income for 
households earning ≤60% of the Area Median 
Income (AMI), adjusted for family size. 
•	 Workforce Housing - Housing that, on an 
annual basis, costs 30% or less than the 
estimated median household income for 
households earning more than 60% but not 
exceeding 120% of the AMI, adjusted for 
family size. 
HUD Definitions
•	 Affordable Housing - Housing where the 
occupant is paying no more than 30% of 
gross income for housing costs, including 
utilities. 
•	 Cost Burden - Spending more than 30% of 
income on housing costs, including rent, 
mortgage payments, utilities, and other fees.
What is “Affordable Housing”?
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  2
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Another critical measure of housing affordability 
is cost burden. A household is considered cost 
burdened if they spend more than 30% of their gross 
income on housing costs. Most recent Census data 
showed that nearly half (49%) of all Nashville’s renters 
and 22% of all homeowners were cost burdened. 
Across both homeowners and renters, certain 
cohorts, such as seniors, single-parent households, 
and Black and Brown households are cost burdened 
at higher rates, based on Census data. Households 
that are cost burden, particularly those at the lower 
end of the income spectrum, may be forced to 
choose between rent and other essentials, such 
as food or medicine. Reducing cost burden across 
all income levels not only improves quality of life 
and housing security but may also contribute to a 
stronger economy where more households have 
greater financial flexibility to spend and invest locally.
Nashville’s housing challenges stem from a 
combination of factors, including limited housing 
supply, rising demand, funding constraints, and 
regulatory barriers. One of the primary drivers of 
housing affordability is the imbalance between 
housing supply and demand – when the availability 
of homes fails to keep pace with population growth 
– impeding residents’ ability to find housing that 
meets their affordability and broader needs. The 
shortage of housing affordable across a range of 
income levels suggests that new housing construction hasn’t matched the demand to live in Nashville. The overall 
balance of demand and supply for housing in Nashville shapes the context in which everything else happens. 
When regulations and market forces make it more expensive to build new housing, higher-income households end 
up buying moderately priced homes instead. They often renovate and upgrade these homes, making them even 
less affordable. This pushes middle-income buyers to look for lower-priced homes, which in turn puts pressure 
on lower-income households, leaving them with fewer options. As this cycle continues, Nashville’s ability to 
stabilize housing becomes more challenging— funding for affordable housing doesn’t go as far because as land 
and building costs rise, more money is needed for emergency housing assistance, and more people are at risk of 
becoming homeless.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
Who needs affordable housing?
Housing is generally considered affordable when households are 
spending no more than 30% of their gross income on housing costs 
which included rent and other expenses like utilities. Every dollar that 
goes to housing is a dollar than cannot go to other needs, including 
food, clothing, childcare, education, and saving for emergencies and 
the future.
An employee working full time (40 
hours) earning minimum wage 
earns on average $22k/year (<30% 
AMI) 
Affordable housing costs would be 
~$550/mo. 
Hotel clerks earn on average $33k/
year. (<50% of the AMI) 
Affordable housing costs would be 
~ $825/mo 
Hairstylists earn on average $43k/
year (<60% of the AMI) 
Affordable housing costs would be ~ 
$1,075/mo 
Family social worker earns on 
average $57k/year (<80% of the 
AMI) 
Affordable housing costs would be ~ 
$1425/mo.
Source: Tennessee Housing Development Agency
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  3
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Recognizing our growing affordability challenges, the Nashville community, including both the private and public 
sector, has embarked on multiple efforts to identify, address, mitigate and remove barriers to housing insecurity. 
These efforts involve a variety of methods, including increasing investment, implementing new policies, studying 
best practices, expanding local capacity, and modifying regulatory processes. Instrumental to mobilizing our 
city’s housing efforts was the release of the Affordable Housing Task Force report. In 2021, Mayor Cooper 
convened an Affordable Housing Task Force, consisting of 22 members across government and non-government 
experts, to provide information on the city’s affordable housing challenges and to provide recommendations 
for how Metro could increase affordable housing. The report laid out an initial list of housing policy and program 
recommendations, many of which have been implemented today. One of the primary recommendations called on 
Metro to establish a dedicated department or entity outside of the Mayor’s Office to focus on affordable housing 
and lead the development of a global, long-term housing plan, the genesis for the Unified Housing Strategy (UHS). 
Metro quickly acted on the Task Force’s recommendation, creating the Housing Division in January 2022, located 
within the Planning Department. Beginning in 2022 with three staff, today the Housing Division is a team of ten. In 
addition, Metro created a separate Office of Homeless Services (OHS) and maintains a collaborative relationship 
with the Metropolitan Development and Housing Agency (MDHA), both agencies are critical partners in affecting 
task force recommendations.
Furthering the recommendations of the task force, Nashville launched its first-ever comprehensive housing 
strategy in 2024 to expand access to safe, stable, and affordable housing for all residents. The Unified Housing 
Strategy is an important first step toward a plan that unites every key partner in our housing ecosystem—public, 
private, and philanthropic—to ensure a more effective, coordinated approach to tackling affordability. Nashville’s 
affordability issues are complex and cannot be solved by a single agency, policy, or tool. However, implementing 
the Unified Housing Strategy through a collective approach can help the community address these issues in a 
more effective and intentional manner. By utilizing a multifaceted set of coordinated strategies, Nashville can 
create lasting solutions that enable residents to not only stay here but thrive here.
Developing a Unified Housing Strategy
First, the significant contributions and leadership of Nashville’s housing partners should be acknowledged. The 
city’s housing ecosystem is driven by bold leadership, innovative solutions, and a shared commitment to ensuring 
that all Nashvillians have access to stable and affordable homes. In 2024, this collective effort yielded significant 
milestones. The Metropolitan Development and Housing Agency (MDHA) surpassed 10,000 affordable apartments 
through its Payment in Lieu of Taxes program, supporting both the creation and preservation of much-needed 
housing. Metro also celebrated the opening of its first permanent supportive housing (PSH) facility launched 
by the standalone Office of Homeless Services (OHS), the Strobel House, providing 90 homes for individuals 
experiencing homelessness. Also, OHS has helped an average of 2,000 households secure stable housing 
through critical support and security deposits and expanded housing options that have kept 88% of unsheltered 
individuals housed which has contributed to a 45% decrease in deaths among people experiencing homelessness 
within one year. Metro’s Housing Division, in partnership with the Community Foundation of Middle Tennessee and 
other funding partners, launched the Nashville Catalyst Fund—an innovative financial tool designed to accelerate 
housing development and preservation. These achievements represent just a fraction of the tireless work being 
done across Nashville to strengthen housing security and reflect the unwavering dedication of the city’s many 
public and private partners.
The development of the Unified Housing Strategy builds on the strengths of these individual entities and suggests 
working towards a more coordinated approach would elevate our collective impact. The UHS began in April 
2024, guided by a rigorous process that combined community engagement, data analysis, and research on best 
practices from across the nation. Led by Metro Nashville’s Housing Division – in coordination with other Metro 
agencies and departments – the effort was supported by HR&A Advisors; MEPR Agency; Pillars Development, 
LLC; and Spencer Rose Consulting, LLC—each bringing expertise in housing policy, community engagement, real 
estate development, and strategic planning. The process was built upon a foundation of stakeholder input and 
data-driven insights. It included an in-depth market analysis, an evaluation of existing programs and policies, and a 
review of successful housing strategies from other cities.
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  4
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

A core element of the UHS 
development was an extensive 
community engagement effort to 
ensure the strategy reflected the 
lived experiences and needs of 
Nashville’s residents. In summer 
2024, the Housing Division and 
MEPR Agency hosted 12 community 
listening sessions, including four 
open sessions and eight targeted 
discussions with community-
based organizations—known as 
UHS Community Ambassadors—
representing populations 
disproportionately impacted by 
housing insecurity. These sessions, 
combined with a public survey and 
stakeholder roundtables, provided 
valuable input from residents, 
housing developers, service 
providers, researchers, government 
officials, and community advocates. 
Alongside community engagement, a comprehensive analysis of Nashville’s housing ecosystem, regulatory 
framework, and available resources was conducted to identify gaps, opportunities, and inefficiencies. The 
ecosystem analysis evaluated the capacity of public and private entities working to support housing security and 
stability, identifying strengths, gaps, and inefficiencies in the current system. The resource analysis examined 
existing local, state, and federal funding, property assets, and incentives to assess their impact on housing 
affordability. Lastly, a policy and regulatory analysis reviewed relevant policies, such as land use, zoning, landlord-
tenant policies, to examine their impact on housing development and preservation. Removing regulatory barriers 
to delivering housing is a key component of this work. The analysis also aimed to improve public understanding of 
the relationship between market-rate development and affordable housing needs. Together, these assessments 
provided critical insights that shaped the Unified Housing Strategy, ensuring it is grounded in data-driven 
solutions and responsive to both local challenges and national best practices. The UHS represents a collaborative, 
data-informed approach to addressing Nashville’s growing housing challenges. By uniting public, private, and 
philanthropic partners under a shared vision, this strategy is laying the groundwork for a unified and coordinated 
housing system and long-term solutions that will ensure all residents—regardless of income—have access to safe, 
stable, and affordable housing.
Community Ambassador 
Organization
Populations Served
AgeWell Middle Tennessee
Older Adults
The Contributor
People who are unhoused, including people who have 
lived experience of being unhoused
Monroe Harding
Opportunity youth (ages 16-26) who  
may be homeless, housing insecure,  
or in subsidized housing
Nashville Organized for Action 
and Hope (NOAH)
Historically underserved communities, including low-
income and low wage workers, individuals experiencing 
housing challenges, and African-Americans
Neighbor 2 Neighbor
Neighborhood leaders and neighborhood associations
Stand Up Nashville
Working Class
Tennessee Disability Coalition
All Tennesseans with disabilities
Tennessee Immigrant and 
Refugee Rights Coalition 
(TIRRC)
Immigrants and Refugees
Urban League of Middle 
Tennessee
African-Americans and other  
historically underserved groups
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  5
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Summary of Key Findings
From the engagement process and analyses, six prominent themes emerged during the development of the UHS. 
•	
Increased Housing Demand: Rapid job and population growth have outpaced housing supply, exacerbating 
affordability challenges. As Nashville continues to attract new residents and businesses, the pressure on the 
housing market intensifies, leading to higher costs and increased competition for available homes. Increasing 
housing supply through a variety of measures will meet economic, workforce, and housing policy goals.
•	
Lack of Affordability: Rising rental and homeownership costs have made it difficult for low- and moderate-
income residents to secure stable housing. Many residents are housing cost burdened, often spending a 
disproportionate share of their income on rent or mortgage payments, leaving little room for other essential 
expenses such as healthcare, education, and transportation. 
•	
Lack of Housing Choice: Many residents, particularly vulnerable populations, struggle to find housing 
that meets their needs in terms of size, location, and accessibility. The availability of affordable housing in 
desirable neighborhoods is scarce, limiting opportunities for families to live near and easily access jobs and 
schools.
•	
Inaccessibility of Homeownership: The American dream of homeownership has become increasingly out of 
reach, especially for households with incomes less than $100,000. Data shows homeownership challenges 
are particularly acute for Black and Hispanic families. Residents will be more able to purchase homes and 
build wealth if barriers are meaningfully addressed, including access to education, jobs, and credit.
•	
Risk of Housing Loss: Rising housing costs and market pressures have increased the risk of housing loss 
for both renters and homeowners in Nashville. Eviction filings have surged above pre-pandemic levels, 
highlighting the urgent need for eviction prevention efforts. Displacement is also occurring through economic 
pressures, as rising home prices outpace local incomes or older properties are redeveloped, making it 
increasingly difficult for longtime residents to remain in their neighborhoods. 
•	
Difficulty Navigating Programs & Resources: Residents face significant barriers in accessing housing 
assistance programs due to a fragmented and complex system. The lack of a centralized, user-friendly 
platform for information and services makes it difficult for those in need to navigate available resources, 
leading to missed opportunities for support.
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  6
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Nashville’s Housing Needs
In addition to the key findings summarized above, the UHS also provides an updated 10-year estimate of our 
overall housing supply needs. Using a jobs-based methodology, the UHS team anticipates Nashville needing an 
additional 90,000 new homes over the next ten years to accommodate for population growth which is expected 
to grow by over 175,000 people in this time frame. This breaks down to around 9,000 new homes annually to meet 
the demand. The forecast further suggests that over half of these new homes be for-sale, both to align with the 
preference of recent in-movers and to address the ongoing shortage of for-sale homes, whose production has 
lagged behind demand since the Great Recession.
The UHS dives deeper into examining what housing prices are most needed in our community. The analysis finds 
that Nashville would benefit from adding an additional 20,000 homes affordable to households earning 60% of the 
Area Median Income (AMI)  or below over the next decade, with a priority on those earning 50% AMI or below—and 
an even more urgent focus on households at or below 30% AMI. The data strongly suggests that the most pressing 
housing shortage is for those earning 30% of the AMI or below. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD) releases updated AMI data annually. The Housing Division maintains the most recent AMI 
info on the Affordable Housing Dashboard that can be found on the State of Housing in Nashville webpage.
Figure 1: 2024 Area Median Income (AMI) for Nashville-Davidson County (Source: US Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, 2024)
Housing Category
30% of AMI
50% of AMI
60% of AMI
75% of AMI
80% of AMI
AMI of All 
Households
1-Person Household
$22,450
$37,450
$44,940
$56,150
$59,850
$74,850
2-Person Household
$25,650
$42,800
$51,360
$64,150
$68,400
$85,550
3-Person Household
$28,850
$42,800
$51,360
$64,150
$68,400
$85,550
4-Person Household
$32,050
$53,450
$64,140
$80,200
$85,500
$106,900
NOTE: The AMI for Nashville includes a ten-county census with the following areas: Cannon County, TN; Cheatham County, TN; Davidson 
County, TN; Dickson County, TN; Robertson County, TN; Rutherford County, TN; Sumner County, TN; Trousdale County, TN; Williamson 
County, TN; and Wilson County, TN.
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  7
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Takeaways from Ecosystem, Resource, and Regulatory 
Analyses
In addition to community engagement and the housing needs analysis, the UHS team conducted an ecosystem, 
resource and regulatory analyses to deepen our understanding of the key players, resources, and policies shaping 
Nashville’s housing landscape. The insights below highlight the challenges and opportunities revealed in each of 
these analyses. While these analyses focus on distinct aspects of Nashville’s housing framework, they are deeply 
interconnected. The effectiveness of the housing ecosystem directly impacts how resources are allocated and 
delivered, while the availability of resources influences the implementation of policies and regulations. 
Ecosystem Analysis 
Nashville’s housing ecosystem is comprised of a number of public and private actors that play direct and indirect 
roles in developing and preserving housing, providing services, funding projects and initiatives, and setting policy. 
The ecosystem analysis, based on research and stakeholder input, identified several gaps and opportunities for 
improvement in Nashville’s housing ecosystem. Key issues include fragmentation and lack of coordination, with 
no clear lead agency organizing housing policy across and beyond Metro, leading to uncoordinated resource 
allocations and resource delivery. Comparing Nashville to other cities revealed the need for a dedicated position 
in the Mayor’s office who would be responsible for offering executive coordination and support to housing efforts 
across Metro departments. Additionally, Nashville’s housing ecosystem would further benefit from enhanced 
capacity in areas like underwriting, policy expertise, data management, and compliance systems. To address 
these challenges, Metro should enhance internal operations, build external private partnerships, and improve 
coordination across relevant partners and resources. 
Resource Analysis 
The resource analysis assessed the sustainability and adequacy of the state, federal, and local funding currently 
supporting Nashville’s housing initiatives. Over the last few years, Metro has increased investments in affordable 
housing, including funding for the Barnes Housing Trust Fund, homeless services, and eviction prevention, largely 
made possible by the influx of American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) dollars. With ARPA funds set to expire and 
growing uncertainty around federal funding, Nashville faces the challenge of meeting increasing housing needs 
with fewer resources. Public subsidy tools – such as tax benefits, grants, and loans – play a crucial role in closing 
the affordability gap in housing development and operations and often require both fiscal resources and enabling 
policy. To sustain and strengthen housing programs, including housing subsidies, the city should enhance 
coordination, maximize existing resources, reduce inefficiencies, and explore new funding sources. However, 
these actions alone are not enough. Support from private partners, such as philanthropies, financial institutions, 
and corporations, is essential to filling funding gaps and supporting initiatives where government cannot.
Policy and Regulatory Analysis
The policy and regulatory analysis evaluated current policy and regulatory factors shaping housing development, 
preservation, and residents’ housing security in Nashville. Key tools influencing the housing market include land 
use regulations and resident protections alongside public resources and subsidies. Across these regulatory tools, 
there are limits due to Tennessee state law. For example, state law limits Nashville from imposing affordability 
requirements or impact fees as a condition of rezoning. State law also limits Nashville’s ability to enact tenant 
protections, restricting the city’s influence to instituting tenant protections only in publicly-funded housing 
rather than across the county. Despite these constraints, these regulatory tools remain among Nashville’s most 
powerful levers for advancing housing. Land use policies that minimize the cost of developing housing also 
serve to stretch dollars further. Public subsidy, when used effectively, focuses on households with the lowest 
incomes. Simultaneously, strong resident protections buffer the impact of market pressure on existing residents, 
reducing the risk of displacement as a property is redeveloped or housing costs rise.  Combined, these tools can 
help address a wide range of needs, from providing permanent housing options for the unhoused to supporting 
individuals and families in purchasing their first home. 
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  8
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Housing Strategies and Actions
Throughout community engagement, we heard from residents and community leaders who clearly voiced the 
desire to prevent families from being priced out of the Nashville market, to invest in housing for those of greatest 
need, to make resources easier to access, and to help residents reduce household costs whenever possible. 
These recommendations coupled with the recent market findings and analyses informed the development of our 
seven key strategies, each focused on creating the best outcomes for Nashvillians. 
The strategies described below are designed to address different aspects of our housing challenges and intended 
to remain relatively constant over the next 10 years. Each strategy is directly informed by what we heard from 
residents and saw in the data, ensuring that solutions are targeted, evidence-based, and responsive to real 
needs. Every strategy includes core actions, an implementation framework, and performance metrics to measure 
progress and drive accountability. Though each strategy is equally important, the strategies begin with a focus 
on building a high functioning ecosystem (Strategy A) and maximizing resource support (Strategy B) both of 
which are fundamental to advancing the other major strategies. The actions, as shown on page 12 and 13,  are 
intended to be much more dynamic with actions expected to be added as new tools are developed or refined if the 
performance is not achieving expectations. 
Strategy A: Enhance and align Nashville’s housing ecosystem to 
comprehensively and collectively address Nashville’s housing needs 
This strategy focuses on enhancing Nashville’s housing ecosystem by improving coordination among key 
stakeholders, expanding our city’s capacity, and fostering collaboration with private sector partners. By creating 
a well-organized and responsive system, the strategy supports sustainable growth and innovation. Key actions 
include creating a position in the Mayor’s office to provide executive level coordination and support housing 
initiatives, aligning housing budgetary requests, and increasing interagency collaboration to ensure accountability 
in housing initiatives. Ultimately, these efforts will better serve all residents seeking stable and affordable housing 
in Nashville. 
Strategy B: Optimize and grow financial and resource support for 
affordable housing across public, private, and philanthropic sectors
This strategy focuses on maximizing and increasing the assets, including land and financial resources, to support 
housing initiatives. Given the rising costs of housing and the limitations of existing federal, state, and local funding, 
this strategy emphasizes the need for sustainable and diversified financial support. Key actions include building 
partnerships with the philanthropic sector, optimizing current housing tools like the Barnes Fund, and layering 
payments-in-lieu-of-taxes with tax credits and incentives, while also exploring new funding sources for affordable 
housing and homelessness services. By optimizing existing resources and securing additional resources, this 
strategy aims to create more affordable housing opportunities, particularly for low- and moderate-income 
residents.
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  9
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Strategy C: Create a range of new and affordable housing choices 
for all Nashvillians as appropriate across the county
This strategy focuses on increasing Nashville’s housing supply with an emphasis on expanding affordable rental 
options for low- to moderate-income residents. Key actions include adjusting land use policies to increase housing 
production, developing a mixed-income housing finance toolkit, prioritizing deeply affordable housing within 
existing programs, and leveraging public land for development. This strategy aims to increase Nashville’s overall 
housing supply but prioritizes building homes for Nashville’s most vulnerable residents. Expanding housing 
options will ensure that all Nashvillians, including teachers, first responders, and service workers, have access to 
safe and affordable homes.
Strategy D: Keep homeowners in their homes and create more 
opportunities for sustainable homeownership and wealth creation
This strategy focuses on expanding access to affordable homeownership and providing support for current 
homeowners. Key actions include leveraging land use to encourage affordable home construction, directing public 
funding to first-generation homebuyers, and supporting programs that provide services to existing homeowners. 
With homeownership becoming increasingly out of reach – especially for households earning less than $100,000 
and minority communities – this strategy seeks to counteract rising home costs and mortgage access challenges 
to make homeownership possible for more residents. The strategy also prioritizes helping older and other 
vulnerable homeowners remain in their homes by addressing maintenance and affordability concerns. 
Strategy E: Create permanent housing options for persons 
experiencing or at-risk of homelessness
This strategy focuses on creating and prioritizing permanent housing options for individuals and families 
transitioning out of homelessness. While Strategy C also supports housing development – particularly affordable 
housing for low- and moderate-income individuals – the unique and urgent needs of people experiencing 
homelessness requires a focused approach. Key actions include advancing the Homelessness Planning Council’s 
(HPC) Strategic Plan, increasing the availability of vouchers for individuals experiencing homelessness, and 
exploring funding sources for rental assistance and services. Though the HPC plan includes advancing permanent 
supportive housing (PSH), a specific plan focused on PSH is essential to coordinate partners, allocate resources, 
and drive action. Thus, a key action involves developing a strategic plan for PSH - an evidence-based solution that 
combines stable housing with voluntary supportive services. This strategy aims to ensure the necessary attention, 
resources, and support are directed towards helping our unhoused residents secure long-term stability. 
Strategy F: Preserve and protect long-term housing affordability 
and stability
This strategy focuses on preserving and protecting the affordability of Nashville’s current and future housing stock 
that provides stability to Nashville’s low- and moderate- income residents. It aims to minimize the loss of naturally 
occurring affordable housing and extend affordability protections for income-restricted housing at risk of expiring 
and becoming no longer affordable to its current residents. Key actions include leveraging the Catalyst Fund to 
support preservation, maintaining and monitoring a countywide database of deed-restricted properties, and 
implementing policies to promote long-term affordability of income-restricted housing. By safeguarding existing 
affordable housing and implementing long-term affordability measures, this strategy helps ensure Nashville 
remains accessible to residents of all income levels.
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  10
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Strategy G: Strengthen housing security for renters and improve 
access to resources for all Nashvillians
This strategy focuses on creating measures to create housing security for renters and on improving the access 
and availability of housing resources for those experiencing or at risk of experiencing a housing crisis. Many 
residents struggle to find or navigate available programs, especially those facing eviction, housing discrimination, 
or affordability challenges. Key actions include making housing resources easier to access, strengthening 
tenant protections in publicly subsidized housing, supporting households facing discrimination, translating 
materials to ensure housing resource information is available in multiple languages, and supporting legal and 
financial assistance for households at risk of displacement. By making housing information more accessible and 
responsive, Nashville can better support residents in a crisis and help them remain stably housed.
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  11
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Enhance and align Nashville’s housing ecosystem to 
comprehensively and collectively address Nashville’s 
housing needs
Optimize and grow financial and resource support 
for affordable housing across public, private, and 
philanthropic sectors
S T R A T E G Y A
S T R A T E G Y B
Unified Housing  
Strategies and Actions
Action 1	
Create an executive-level role in the Mayor’s Office to 
oversee and advance policies and solutions to address 
Nashville’s housing needs
Action 1a	
Create an interdepartmental leadership 
group to coordinate housing funding and 
services and execute MOUs with key public 
partners to formalize responsibilities and 
reporting requirements
Action 1b	
Ensure operating and capital spending 
plan appropriations related to housing and 
homelessness further the strategies and 
actions of the UHS and support strong 
housing and service delivery
Action 2	
Increase capacity and expertise of Metro agencies, either 
internally or through external partners
Action 3	
Invest in infrastructure that supports affordable housing 
and safe communities
Action 4	
Continue support for development partners through 
streamlined reviews and increased communications and 
marketing
Action 5	
Coordinate request-for-proposals (RFP) or intake 
process for allocating resources and align reporting 
requirements
Action 6	
Enhance support of emerging developers and small 
business enterprises
Action 7	
Explore new dedicated local and state funding sources 
for affordable housing and homeless services
Action 8	
Tap new and underutilized resources
Action 9	
Attract mission-motivated capital and corporate partners
Action 10	
Build strategic partnerships with philanthropic sector
Action 11	
Establish underwriting capacity, requirements, and 
criteria to maximize public investments in housing
Action 12	
Position existing housing tools to align with UHS 
priorities
Action 12a 	 Focus the Barnes Fund to maximize its 
impact
Action 12b 	Make affordable housing a threshold-
eligibility requirement to access Tax 
Increment Financing and Payment-in-Lieu of 
Taxes for residential and mixed-use projects
Action 13 	
Evaluate and adjust zoning and land use policies to 
unlock development opportunities, expand housing 
types, and increase annual housing production
Action 14 	
Implement voluntary zoning incentives for attainable 
housing
Action 15	
Leverage publicly owned land portfolio by advancing infill 
development, co-location, and policy changes to ensure 
strong management of land assets
Action 16 	
Develop a mixed-income housing financing tooklit and 
invest in sophisticated underwriting and finance capacity 
to support
Action 16a	 Consider using Bond authority to facilitate 
mixed-income development
Action 16b 	Optimize the Mixed-Income PILOT while 
evolving and strengthening priorities and 
requirements to increase focus on deeper 
affordability, geographic choice, and market 
adaptability
Action 16c	 Build out capacity to attract or deploy new 
debt sources such as below-market senior 
debt and leverage authorized entities to 
access this financing
Action 17 	
Continue strong production of affordable housing using 
LIHTC
Action 17a	 Ensure the continued operation and 
functioning of the LIHTC Payment in Lieu 
of Taxes (PILOT) program administered by 
MDHA
Action 17b	 Monitor LIHTC requirements and align local 
tools to help maximize competitiveness
Action 18	
Prioritize new income-restricted housing for vulnerable 
residents (e.g., families with children, older adults, 
persons with disabilities, and justice-impacted persons)
Action 19 	
Prioritize the development of deeply affordable housing 
within existing programs
Action 19a	 Offer deeper incentives for deeply affordable 
housing in locally subsidized affordable 
housing tools, including Barnes funded 
rental projects
Action 19b	 Continue funding the Connecting Housing 
and Infrastructure Program (CHIP) and 
identify how it can support the viability of 
deeply affordable projects
Action 19c	 Strategically deploy project-based vouchers 
to support deeply affordable housing
Action 20	
Commit multi-year capital spending for infrastructure 
investments for MDHA transformation projects to 
increase deeply affordable housing and support 
increased density
Create a range of new and affordable housing 
choices for all Nashvillians as appropriate across the 
county
S T R A T E G Y C
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  12
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Keep homeowners in their homes and create more 
opportunities for sustainable homeownership and 
wealth creation
Preserve and protect long-term housing affordability 
and stability
Strengthen housing security for renters and improve 
access to resources for all Nashvillians
S T R A T E G Y E
S T R A T E G Y F
S T R A T E G Y G
Action 28	
Advance the Office of Homeless Services and the 
Homelessness Planning Council’s Strategic Plan
Action 28a	 Prioritize vouchers for those transitioning 
out of or at risk of homelessness
Action 28b	Encourage a local homelessness preference 
at MDHA-owned housing
Action 28c	 Explore reliable sources for operations 
(rental assistance) and supportive services
Action 28d	Bolster the tools, resources, strategies, and 
funding to support the Low Barrier Housing 
Collective
Action 29	
Develop a strategic plan for Permanent Supportive 
Housing to support annual creation of 900 PSH units 
for individuals experiencing or at risk of experiencing 
homelessness
Action 29a	 Designate a lead agency to develop and 
implement a PSH strategic plan for Nashville
Action 29b	Continue advocating for state PSH set-aside 
in Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Qualified 
Allocation Plan
Action 30	
Incorporate mechanisms, such as right of first refusal, 
and support existing mechanisms, such as LIHTC PILOT, 
into local programs to protect affordability for the long-
term
Action 31	
Prioritize projects that will provide long-term or 
perpetual affordability, such as long-term ground leases, 
community land trusts, and social housing
Action 32	
Maintain and monitor a countywide database of all deed 
restricted affordable units
Action 33	
Leverage the Catalyst Fund to support preservation
Action 34	
Support a preservation pool that includes ability to 
acquire expiring affordable stock
Action 35	
Incorporate stronger tenant protections in publicly 
subsidized income-restricted affordable housing
Action 36	
Support the Eviction Right to Counsel program
Action 37	
Improve court processes for parties involved in an 
eviction
Action 38	
Monitor need for expanded emergency rental assistance 
funding and infrastructure
Action 39	
Support the Tennessee Fair Housing Council
Action 40	
Require recipients of public funds and incentives to 
participate in annual fair housing training
Action 41	
Strengthen and expand hubNashville to centralize and 
improve access to housing resources for residents
Action 42	
Ensure information about housing resources is easily 
accessible and translated into the most widely spoken 
languages in Nashville
Action 43	
Leverage the Codes Department to support vulnerable 
homeowners and tenants and inform program outreach
Action 21	
Leverage land use to expand the availability of entry-level 
homeownership
Action 22	
Focus public funds for homeownership on those facing 
systemic barriers
Action 23	
Assess appraisal process for opportunities to enhance 
fairness and transparency
Action 24	
Require pre- and post-purchase counseling for buyers 
purchasing publicly-funded homes
Action 25	
Identify partnerships to promote estate planning for 
Nashvillians with a focus on marginalized populations
Action 26	
Support homeowners struggling to pay property taxes
Action 27	
Support programs that help keep homeowners 
stably housed through home repairs, accessibility 
modifications, and opportunities to create passive 
income
Keep homeowners in their homes and create more 
opportunities for sustainable homeownership and 
wealth creation
S T R A T E G Y D
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  13
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions

Next Steps: Implementation  
and Ongoing Engagement 
With the Unified Housing Strategy (UHS) now finalized, the focus shifts to implementation. Bringing these 
strategies to life will require collaborative efforts and sustained resources, including access to reliable and 
timely housing data, financial investments, and staffing capacity. Some of the strategies and actions within the 
Unified Housing Strategy, particularly those focused on building capacity, are initially focused on the Housing 
Division. Moving forward, executing many of these actions will involve multiple partners and other lead entities, 
necessitating the expansion of capacities and expertise across various departments as well as the addition of 
philanthropic and private sector support. As work on these strategies progresses, we will continue to strengthen 
alignment, deepen collaboration, and enhance our collective ability to advance housing solutions effectively.
Accompanying the UHS is an implementation plan which will help guide and prioritize next steps. The plan 
outlines the lead entity responsible for advancing each action, identifies the public and private partners needed, 
specifies the level of resources required, indicates the types of resources needed for implementation, establishes 
recommended timeframes, and prioritizes actions based on urgency. The implementation plan is intended to 
be used by both private and public partners, providing a clear direction on recommended next steps towards 
building a Nashville where everyone has access to safe, affordable housing. In addition, Metro will prepare an 
Annual Policy Priorities document to specifically clarify Metro’s focus on UHS goals in each fiscal year based 
on the approved Metro budget. While Metro departments play a critical role, the contributions of the private 
sector – including developers, financial institutions, real estate firms, employers, and philanthropic organizations 
– are equally vital and cannot be understated. Every Nashvillian has a role to play in ensuring the success of this 
strategy—whether through policymaking, advocacy, public-private partnerships, or community engagement. The 
Metro Council, Mayor’s Office, community organizations, Metro agencies, and private sector partners must work 
together to advance the actions outlined in the UHS.
As stated, this is a living strategy that will evolve as conditions shift and change. The public will have ongoing 
opportunities to engage, provide feedback, and help shape future updates to the strategy. To ensure 
accountability, the UHS also includes performance metrics for each strategy that will be used to track progress 
and measure impact over time. These metrics will help guide adjustments to the approach as needed, ensuring 
that efforts remain responsive to Nashville’s evolving housing challenges.
By committing to implementation, accountability, and ongoing engagement, Nashville can collectively make 
meaningful progress toward ensuring that all residents have access to safe, stable and affordable housing – now 
and in the future.
Learn More About the Unified Housing Strategy! 
The full Unified Housing Strategy and Implementation Plan, which includes an in-depth analysis of the key findings, 
our housing tools, ecosystem, and demand, further details on the Strategies & Actions, and Metro’s plan to 
implement the UHS, can be found on Nashville.gov/UHS.
Nashville Unified Housing Strategy  |  14
UHS Key Findings, Strategies, and Actions