WHEREAS, Metro Code Chapter 7.05 (Income Tax Administration for Personal Income and
Business Taxes) administers Metro’s Supportive Housing Services (SHS) business and personal income
taxes; and
WHEREAS, when the Supportive Housing Services income taxes took effect, Metro Code
originally established a ten percent per annum interest rate for tax deficiencies and refunds. However, the
Metro Code authorized a discretionary change of the interest rate by administrative rule if Metro’s interest
rate differed by more than one percentage point from the Oregon Department of Revenue’s interest rate in
effect on January 1; and
WHEREAS, with respect to the SHS Personal Income Tax Law, Metro has adjusted the original
ten percent per annum rate to lower interest rates during the last few years to match the Oregon
Department of Revenue interest rates (which in turn are guided by federal interest rates); and
WHEREAS, changing the Metro SHS Personal Income Tax interest rate to match the Oregon
Department of Revenue interest rate requires a revised and updated administrative rule each year; and
WHEREAS, this process requires coordination with Metro’s tax administrator, imposes
uncertainty on taxpayers and tax preparers until the rate is officially adjusted, and requires staff time from
two jurisdictions to draft, administer, and implement; and
WHEREAS, amending the Metro Income Tax Code to codify the previous interest rate
adjustments and automatically adjust Metro’s future SHS Personal Income Tax interest rates to match the
Oregon Department of Revenue’s interest rate (as it exists on January 1 of any given year) would provide
greater certainty to taxpayers, streamline the interest rate adjustment process, and essentially automate the
more cumbersome two-step process currently in place; and
WHEREAS, to provide taxpayer relief, in June 2025 the Metro Council amended the Metro
Income Tax Code to index the personal income tax thresholds to inflation, and Council also increased the
required payment threshold of estimated taxes from $1000 to $5000 (Ordinance No. 25-1531); and
WHEREAS, the 2025 inflation and estimated tax code amendments require technical conforming
Code updates to further clarify the amounts and tax years to which those changes apply and to update
certain code section cross-references; and
WHEREAS, the Metro Council has previously acknowledged that externally facing regulatory
Metro Code chapters—primarily the solid waste and income tax code chapters—require more frequent
code updates to ensure ongoing regulatory clarity, align with state and federal law changes, and maintain
best practices (Resolution No. 22-5293); and
Page 1 Ordinance No. 26-1540

Docusign Envelope ID: 71AFBBB6-D1BA-48A8-B876-E13FD5897D6B
WHEREAS, pursuant to Resolution No. 22-5293, the Office of Metro Attorney reviewed Metro
Code Sections 7.05.280, 7.05.300, and 7.06.070 to consider whether any plain language best practices
changes were necessary and determined that no additional changes were needed; now therefore,
THE METRO COUNCIL ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
1. Metro Code Section 7.05.280 (Interest) is amended as set forth in the attached as Exhibit A,
with inserted language in underlined text and deleted language in strikethrough text.
2. Metro Code Section 7.05.300 (Interest on Refunds) is amended as set forth in the attached as
Exhibit B, with inserted language in underlined text and deleted language in strikethrough
text.
3. Metro Administrative Rule No. AR-7.05-1005 (Personal Income Tax Interest Rates on Tax
Due and Refunds) is repealed. The interest rates and refund rates established by that
administrative rule are codified in the new Metro Code Subsection 7.05.280(c) and Metro
Code Section 7.05.300 as set forth in the attached Exhibits A and B.
4. Metro Code Section 7.06.070 (Individuals Required to File a Tax Return) is amended as set
forth in the attached Exhibit C, with inserted language in underlined text and deleted
language in strikethrough text.
5. The Chief Operating Officer may, if necessary, adopt new administrative rules or amend
existing income tax administrative rules without a public comment process to ensure
conformity with the Metro Code amendments adopted by this ordinance.
6. That this ordinance being necessary for the immediate preservation of public health, safety or
welfare, an emergency is declared to exist, and this ordinance takes effect immediately upon
adoption pursuant to Metro Charter Section 38(1). The Council finds that an immediate
ordinance effective date is necessary to prevent taxpayer confusion and filing errors (thus
saving taxpayer money to administer the program), maintain alignment with the Oregon
Department of Revenue, avoid administrative disruption and duplicative rulemaking, and
ensure consistent tax code enforcement.
7. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds that any portion of this ordinance is invalid or
unenforceable as a matter of law, that finding does not invalidate or render unenforceable any
other provisions of this ordinance.
ADOPTED by the Metro Council this 5th day of February 2026.