- All right. It's 10 a.m. So we'll go ahead and get started going on
the record.
This is a deposition of Mark Meadows, conducted by the House Select Committee
to Investigate the January 6th Attack on the United States Capitol, pursuant to House
Resolution 503.
My name is-. That's- and I'm the chief investigative
counsel to the select committee. With me today are ■, who is a senior
investigative counsel, and Ms. Zoe Lofgren, who is a member of the select committee, is
also participating remotely.
Based on an agreement with counsel to Mr. Meadows, this deposition was to
begin at 10 a.m. It is now 10 a.m., and Mr. Meadows has not appeared.
Mr. Meadows received a subpoena, dated September 23rd, 2021, requiring him to
produce documents to the select committee and appear for a deposition. Staff engaged
in several discussions with Mr. Meadows' counsel regarding the scope of his production
and the subject matters to be developed at his deposition.
Staff provided Mr. Meadows' counsel with specific areas in which it is interested
and asked Mr. Meadows to identify those that would trigger a privilege assertion.
Rather than engage with the select committee, Mr. Meadows asserted that, as a former
White House chief of staff, he cannot be compelled to provide information to Congress.
He communicated his blanket assertion of immunity, in addition to claims of executive
privilege, in writing to Chairman Thompson.
On November 12th, 2021, the select committee convened the scheduled
deposition of Mr. Meadows after the current White House indicated, in writing, that
President Biden would not assert any immunity or privilege that would prevent Mr.

Meadows from appearing and answering the committee's questions.
Mr. Meadows did not appear for that deposition on November 12th, as indicated
in his prior correspondence.
He also failed to produce any documents responsive to the select committee's
subpoena or a privilege log asserting claims of privilege for specific documents.
After Mr. Meadows failed to appear for his deposition or produce documents,
select committee staff engaged in further discussions with Mr. Meadows' counsel
regarding the status of his noncooperation.
Mr. Meadows ultimately agreed to produce some documents and to appear for a
deposition today, December 8th, 2021, at 10 a.m., an offer which the chairman extended
to him as a good-faith effort to enable Mr. Meadows to cure his failure to comply with
the September 23rd subpoena and provide information relevant to the select
committee's investigation.
Mr. Meadows has now produced documents. Counsel made clear that Mr.
Meadows intended to withhold some responsive information due to a claim of executive
privilege. He agreed to produce documents he believes are not covered by that or any
other privilege and to produce a privilege log identifying responsive documents withheld
due to such privilege assertions.
He also agreed to appear for a deposition, at which he would be asked questions
on subject matters relevant to the select committee's inquiry, as identified in our prior
correspondence, and either answer the questions or articulate a claimed privilege.
We agreed with Mr. Meadows' counsel that this production and deposition would
clarify Mr. Meadows' position on the application of various privileges and create a record
for further discussion and consideration of possible enforcement by the select
committee.

Consistent with that agreement, Mr. Meadows did produce documents and
privilege logs. More specifically, he produced approximately 6,600 pages of records
taken from personal email accounts he used to conduct official business, as well as a
privilege log describing other emails over which he claims privilege protection. He also
produced approximately 2,000 text messages, which Mr. Meadows sent or received using
a personal device which he used for official business, in addition to a privilege log, in
which he describes privilege claims over other withheld text messages.
Mr. Meadows was scheduled to appear today, December 8th, 2021, for a
deposition. However, he has not appeared and is not present today. We received
correspondence from Mr. Meadows' attorney yesterday indicating that, despite his prior
agreement to appear today, his position has changed and he would not appear.
We are disappointed in Mr. Meadows' failure to appear as planned, as it deprives
the select committee of an opportunity to develop relevant information in Mr. Meadows'
possession and to, more specifically, understand the contours of his executive privilege
claim.
Again, the purpose of today's proceeding was to ask Mr. Meadows questions that
we believe would be outside of any cognizable claim of executive, attorney client, Fifth
Amendment, or other potentially applicable privilege.
Our hope is that he would answer those questions, which would materially
advance the select committee's investigation, given Mr. Meadows' service as White
House chief of staff. We expected that he would assert privileges in response to various
questions, articulating the specific privilege he believes is implicated and how it applies to
the question asked. We planned to evaluate Mr. Meadows' privilege assertions after
today's proceeding, engage in further discussions with Mr. Meadows' counsel, and
consider whether enforcement steps were appropriate and necessary.

Mr. Meadows' failure to appear for today's deposition deprives us of the
opportunity to engage in that process. Instead, we are left with Mr. Meadows'
complete refusal to appear for his deposition or cure his willful noncompliance with the
select committee's subpoena.
Had Mr. Meadows appeared for his deposition today, we would have asked him a
series of questions about subjects that we believe are well outside of any claim of
executive privilege. More specifically, we would have asked Mr. Meadows questions
about his use of personal email and cellular phones.
Mr. Meadows' document production includes documents taken from two Gmail
accounts. We would've asked him how and for what purpose he used those Gmail
accounts and when he used one of them as opposed to his official White House email
account. We would've similarly asked him about his use of a personal cellular
telephone.
We would have sought to develop information about when Mr. Meadows used his
personal cell phone for calls and text messages and when he used his official White House
cell phone for those purposes.
Mr. Meadows' production of documents shows that he used the Gmail accounts
and his personal cellular phone for official business related to his service as White House
chief of staff. Given that fact, we would ask Mr. Meadows about his efforts to preserve
those documents and provide them to the National Archives, as required by the
Presidential Records Act. Finally, we would have asked Mr. Meadows about his use of a
signal account, which is reflected in the text messages he produced.
In addition, we would have asked Mr. Meadows about particular emails that he
produced to the select committee. We do not believe these emails implicate any valid
claim of executive or other privilege, given that Mr. Meadows has produced the emails to

the select committee.
Specifically, we would've asked Mr. Meadows about emails about the Electoral
Count Act and the prospect of State legislators sending alternate slates of electors to
Congress, including a November 7th, 2020, email with attachments. We would've asked
him about emails reflecting the Trump campaign's effort to challenge election results,
including a December 23rd email from Mr. Meadows indicating that, quote, "Rudy was
put in charge. That was the President's decision," end quote, that reflects a direct
communication between Mr. Meadows and the President.
We would've asked him about emails from Mr. Meadows to leadership at the
Department of Justice on December 29th and 30th, 2020, and January 1st, 2021,
encouraging investigations of suspected voter fraud, including claims that had been
previously rebutted by State and Federal investigators and rejected by Federal courts.
We would have asked Mr. Meadows about emails regarding the deployment of
the National Guard on January 6th, including a January 5th email from Mr. Meadows in
which he indicates that the Guard would be present at the Capitol to, quote, "protect
pro-Trump people," end quote.
In addition, we would have asked Mr. Meadows about specific text messages he
sent or received that he has produced to the select committee. Given Mr. Meadows'
production of these text messages to the select committee, they do not, in our view,
implicate any valid claim of executive or other privilege.
We would've specifically asked Mr. Meadows about text messages regarding
efforts to encourage Republican legislators in certain States to send alternate slates of
electors to Congress, including a message sent by Mr. Meadows on December 8th, 2020,
in which Mr. Meadows said, quote, "We are," end quote, and another text from Mr.
Meadows to someone else in which he said that, quote, "We have a team on it," end

quote.
We would have asked Mr. Meadows about text messages sent to and from
Members of Congress, including text messages received from a Member of Congress in
November of 2020 regarding efforts to contact State legislators because, as Mr. Meadows
indicates in his text messages, quote, "POTUS wants to chat with them," end quote,
which reflects a direct communication with the President, as well as texts in December of
2020 regarding the prospect of the President's appointment of Jeffrey Clark as Acting
Attorney General.
We would've asked Mr. Meadows about text messages sent to and from another
Member of Congress in November of 2020, in which the member indicates that, quote,
the President asked him to call Governor Ducey, end quote, and in which Mr. Meadows
asks for contact information for the attorney general of Arizona to discuss allegations of
election fraud.
We would've asked Mr. Meadows about text messages sent to and received from
Members of the House of Representatives and the Senate about objections to the
certification of electors in certain States on January 6th. We would have asked him
about text messages sent to and received from a Senator regarding the Vice President's
power to reject electors, including a text in which Mr. Meadows recounts a direct
communication with President Trump who, according to Mr. Meadows in his text
messages, quote, "thinks the legislators have the power, but the VP has power too," end
quote.
We would have asked Mr. Meadows about text messages sent to and received
from a media personality on December 12th, 2021, regarding the negative impact of
President Trump's election challenges on the Senate runoff elections in Georgia,
President Trump's prospects for election in 2024, and Mr. Meadows possible employment

by a news channel.
We would've asked Mr. Meadows about text messages sent to and received from
an organizer of the January 6th events on the Ellipse about planning the event, including
details about who would speak at the event and where certain individuals would be
located.
We'd ask Mr. Meadows about text messages regarding President Trump's
January 2nd, 2021, phone call with Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger,
including texts to and from participants in the call as it took place, as well as text
messages to and received from Members of Congress after the call took place regarding
strategy for dealing with criticism of the call.
We would've asked Mr. Meadows about text messages exchanged with various
individuals, including Members of Congress, on January 6th, both before, during, and
after the attack on the United States Capitol, including text messages encouraging Mr.
Meadows to facilitate a statement by President Trump discouraging violence at the
Capitol on January 6th, including a text exchange with a media personality who had
encouraged the Presidential statement asking people to, quote, "peacefully leave the
Capitol," end quote, as well as a text sent to one of -- by one of the President's family
members indicating that Mr. Meadows is, quote, "pushing hard," end quote, for a
statement from President Trump to, quote, "condemn this shit," end quote, happening at
the Capitol.
Text messages: We would ask Mr. Meadows questions about text messages
reflecting Mr. Meadows' skepticism about public statements regarding allegations of
election fraud put forth by Sidney Powell and his skepticism about the veracity of claims
of tampering with Dominion voting machines.
In addition, we would've asked Mr. Meadows questions about specific

representations in a book he has authored, "The Chief's Chief," in which he recounts
various facts relevant to the select committee's investigation and directly describes
communications with the President, including on page 259, quote, "A few sentences later,
President Trump ad libbed a line that no one had seen before, saying, 'Now it is up to
Congress to confront this egregious assault on our democracy. After this, we're going to
walk down -- and I'll be there with you -- we're going to walk down to the Capitol and
we're going to cheer on our brave Senators and Congressmen and women. We're
probably not going to be cheering so much for some of them because you'll never take
back our country with weakness. You have to show strength. You have to be strong.'
When he got off stage, President Trump let me know that he had been speaking
metaphorically about the walk to the Capitol. He knew as well as anyone that we
wouldn't organize a trip like that on such short notice," end quote.
We would've asked Mr. Meadows about another passage in his book that appears
on page 261. Quote, "In the aftermath of the attack, President Trump was mortified.
He knew the media would take this terrible incident and twist it around. He also knew
his days on Twitter were probably numbered," end quote.
We would've asked Mr. Meadows about another passage on page 261 in his book.
Quote, "'Mark,' Trump would say to me, 'Look, if I lost, I'd have no problem admitting it.
I would sit back and retire and probably have a much easier life, but I didn't lose. People
need me to get back to work. We're not done yet,"' end quote.
We would've asked Mr. Meadows about another passage in his book on page 264
that reflects, quote, "On January 20th, with less than 5 hours left in his historic
Presidency, at a time when most outgoing Presidents would be quietly making notes for
their memoirs and taking stock of their time in the White House, President Trump was
being forced to defend his legacy yet again. 'How do we look in Congress,' President

Trump asked? 'I've heard that there are some Republicans who might be turning
against us. That would be a very unwise thing for them to do,"' end quote.
We would've asked him about another passage on page 265 of his book. Quote,
"But I assured President Trump, once again, that all would be well with the impeachment
trial, and we discussed what my role in the proceedings would be after we left the White
House," end quote.
We would've asked him about the passage on page 266 in his book where he
recounts, quote, "On the phone on January 20th, President Trump spoke as if he wasn't
planning to go anywhere. He mentioned the long list of pardons we hadn't been able to
complete largely due to the slowness on the part of various attorneys in the Federal
Government. He wondered again about the precise details of the impeachment trial,
including how much money the new lawyers would charge and how we could best defend
him against the Democrats' attacks," end quote.
These passages reflect direct communications between Mr. Meadows and
President Trump directly impacting his claims of executive privilege.
Finally, we would ask Mr. Meadows questions about statements in his book about
his interactions with the Department of Justice. Specifically, he addresses such
interactions with the Department of Justice on pages 257 and 258 of his book, in which he
says, quote, "It didn't surprise me that our many referrals to the Department of Justice
were not seriously investigated. I never believed they would, given the track record of
that Department in President Trump's first term," end quote.
Again, statements in Mr. Meadows' book directly reflect subject matters that the
select committee seeks to develop, and his public statements directly impact his claims of
executive privilege.
But, as of the current time, which is now 10:17, Mr. Meadows still has not

appeared to cure his earlier noncompliance with the select committee's September 23rd,
2021, subpoena. So we will not be able to ask any of those questions about the
documents and messages that he apparently agrees are relevant to the select committee
and not protected by any protective privilege.
I'd also note for the record that Congressman Adam Schiff, a member of the select
committee, has joined and, again, that member of the committee, Representative
Lofgren, has joined.
Before we close the record, Mr. Schiff or Ms. Lofgren, do either of you have any
comments to make for the record?
Mr. Schiff. I do not. Thank you.
Ms. Lofgren, anything?
Ms. Lofgren. I'm good.
~ Okay. Thank you.
Accordingly, the record of this deposition of Mark Meadows, now at 10:18 a.m., is
closed.
[Whereupon, at 10:18 a.m., the deposition was concluded.]