Date: February , 2025 Prepared by: Shane Abma
Department: Office of Metro Attorney Presented by: Shane Abma
Meeting Date: February 20, 2025 Length: 10 minutes
The Office of Metro Attorney (OMA) periodically reviews Metro Code chapters when
circumstances arise that require Metro to adhere to the requirements and processes set
forth in Metro Code. The Metro Council is considering referring a ballot measure to the
voters related to Metro’s Supportive Housing Services Program.
While reviewing Metro Code Chapter 9.02 (Ballot Measures, Initiative and Referendum) to
ensure that Metro follow its applicable requirements for ballot measure referrals, OMA
determined that Chapter 9.02 contains an unnecessary, potentially confusing, and
constitutionally inapplicable code requirement related to Metro Council referrals. OMA
recommends removing this inapplicable requirement from Code. Further, as required by
Resolution No. 22-5293, OMA also conducted a review of Chapter 9.02 in its entirety for
potential plain and inclusive language improvements. This ordinance therefore also
includes several non-substantive updates to Chapter 9.02 to improve readability.
OMA requests that Metro Council adopt Ordinance No. 25-1528 (updating Metro Code
Chapter 9.02 ).
1) Remove a potentially confusing, unnecessary, and inapplicable requirement related to
Metro Council measure referrals (the “full text” requirement, discussed below).
2) Improve the readability of Chapter 9.02 by applying plain and inclusive language best
practices as required by Metro Council Resolution No. 22-5293.
Adopt this ordinance. This will remove an unnecessary, potentially confusing, and
constitutionally inapplicable code requirement related to Metro Council referrals, while
also improving the readability of Chapter 9.02.
Do not adopt this ordinance. A failure to adopt this ordinance may cause uncertainty
and confusion regarding an otherwise unnecessary and constitutionally inapplicable

Metro Code requirement related to Metro Council referrals. This could potentially delay
final certification of any ballot measure referral in the future.
Direct OMA to update only those sections of current code that are confusing and not
legally required for referrals, initiatives, and referendums, without also incorporating
suggested plain language improvements.
OMA recommends that Metro Council adopt Ordinance No. 25-1528, which will improve
the readability of Metro’s Code Chapter 9.02 relating to Referrals, Initiatives, and
Referendums and remove an unnecessary, potentially confusing, and constitutionally
inapplicable code requirement related to Metro Council referrals.
The Office of Metro Attorney seeks a Metro Code that is easy to read and understand with
clear requirements. Regular code updates help ensure that the Metro Code remains current
with plain and concise language, is consistent with state and constitutional law
requirements, and provides appropriate guidance to those governed by the Code.
There is no known opposition. However, because of the administrative nature of this
code chapter, OMA did not perform external outreach related to these changes.
Current Metro Code Chapter 9.02, Metro Charter, ORS Chapter 255, the Oregon
Constitution, and the Oregon Secretary of State’s
.
The Metro Code will be easier to read and understand, and these changes will remove a
potentially confusing, unnecessary, and inapplicable requirement related to Metro
Council measure referrals.
There are no financial implications.
Oregon law authorizes three kinds of ballot measures: citizen initiatives, citizen
referendums on adopted legislation, and government referrals to voters for new legislation.
The Oregon Constitution requires that ballot contain the “full text of the
proposed law []”. (Oregon Constitution Article IV, section (1)(2)(d)). Notably, Oregon’s
constitutional “full text” requirement does not apply to or ; it only
applies to initiatives.

Docusign Envelope ID: FE3C540D-3506-4A99-B215-2B8740E94ED5
referral
Metro Code Chapter 9.02 governs Metro’s procedures for referrals, initiatives, and
referendums. Metro Code Section 9.02.020(b) currently states that a Metro Council
must contain “the full text” of the measure. (“The [referral] resolution shall include the full
text of the measure.”) OMA interprets this provision to mean that Metro must include the
complete text of any measure or ordinance adopted by the Metro Council and for which the
Council is referring to voters for approval. For example, this means that Metro Council
could not simply refer a measure by reference, such as “Metro Council refers Ordinance No.
____”, without including the text of the ordinance as well.
Unfortunately, one could erroneously misinterpret Metro Code’s “full text” requirement
with respect to referrals to require something beyond what is constitutionally required of
referrals, when in fact “full text” is a term of art that only applies to initiatives.
referrals
Thus, OMA recommends removing any reference to a “full text” requirement in Metro Code
for because that constitutional requirement does not apply to referrals. Preserving
Ait TinT MACeHtrMo CEoNdTeS c ould create confusion and delay final ballot title certification.
None.
Page 3 – Staff Report for Ordinance No. 25-1528